The **Crimean crisis** is an ongoing international crisis principally
involving Russia and Ukraine. Most developments apply to the Crimean
Peninsula, formerly a multi-ethnic region of Ukraine composed of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the administratively separate
municipality of Sevastopol; both are populated by an ethnic Russian
majority and a minority of both ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars.

The crisis unfolded in late February 2014 in the aftermath of the
Ukrainian Revolution, when—after months of protests by Euromaidan and
days of violent clashes between protesters and police in the Ukrainian
capital Kiev—the President of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, fled the
capital on February 21. The Verkhovna Rada (the parliament of Ukraine)
subsequently voted unanimously to impeach Yanukovych. This was followed
by the interim appointment of the Yatsenyuk Government, as well as the
appointment of a new Acting President of Ukraine, Oleksandr Turchynov.

However, Russian President Vladimir Putin has said President Yanukovych
was illegally impeached and that Russia continues to regard him as
Ukraine’s legitimate president. Russia describes the Yatsenyuk
government as "self-proclaimed" and the events in Kiev as a "coup
d'etat". Yanukovych supporters point out that not enough members of the
parliament were present for the vote to reach the three-fourths majority
required to impeach a President according to the Constitution of
Ukraine.

Beginning on February 26, pro-Russian forces gradually took control of
the Crimean peninsula. Russia claimed that the uniformed men were local
self-defense forces, but they are generally reported in Western media to
be Russian military personnel without insignia..

On 27 February 2014, unknown forces seized the Building of the Supreme
Council of Crimea (the regional parliament) and the building of the
Council of Ministers in Simferopol. The Crimean Supreme Council then
proceeded to hold an emergency session and passed a motion of no
confidence in the Council of Ministers and adopted a resolution to
terminate its powers. The parliament dismissed the Chairman and Prime
Minister of Crimea, Anatolii Mohyliov and replaced him with Sergey
Aksyonov. This version of events is disputed by Russia.

On March 11, the Supreme Council of Crimea and the City Council of
Sevastopol adopted a joint resolution expressing their intention to
unilaterally declare Crimea's independence from Ukraine as a single
united nation with the possibility of joining the Russian Federation as
a federal subject. The question of secession was put to a referendum on
March 16. Official returns indicated nearly 96% in favor. Election
officials reported a record high turnout, despite many Tatars and
opponents of the referendum who claim to have boycotted the vote.

The Ukrainian parliament has declared the referendum is contrary to the
Constitution of Ukraine. The United States and the European Union
condemned the vote as illegal.

On March 17, the Crimean parliament officially declared its independence
from Ukraine and requested to join the Russian Federation. On March 18,
President Putin reclaimed Crimea as a part of Russia on both moral and
material grounds, citing the international legal principle of
self-determination and Crimea's strategic importance for Russia.

In response to the crisis, the United States and European Union have
imposed sanctions against persons they deem to have violated or assisted
in the violation of Ukraine's sovereignty.

Background
----------

The Crimean Khanate, a vassal of the Ottoman Empire, was Treaty of Küçük
Kaynarca|conquered by the Russian Empire in 1783. Following its
incorporation into the Russian Empire, Crimea became the "heart of
Russian Romanticism" and the region continued to attract vacationers
well after the Russian Empire was replaced by the Soviet Union. The
demographics of Crimea have undergone dramatic changes in the past
centuries.

Crimea had autonomy within the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist
Republic as the Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic from 1921
until 1945, when Joseph Stalin deported the Crimean Tatars and abolished
Crimean autonomy. In 1954, the Soviet Union under Nikita Khrushchev
transferred the Crimean Oblast from the Russian SFSR to the Ukrainian
SSR, in a "symbolic gesture" that seemed insignificant at the time,
since both republics were a part of the Soviet Union. Crimea's pre-1945
autonomy was re-established with the Crimean sovereignty referendum in
1991, the final year of the Soviet Union's existence.

In 1992, the Crimean Parliament voted to hold a referendum to declare
independence, while the Russian Parliament voted to void the cession of
Crimea to Ukraine. In 1994, Russian nationalist Yuri Meshkov won the
1994 Crimean presidential election and organized a referendum on
Crimea's status. Later in that same year, Crimea's legal status as part
of Ukraine was recognized by Russia, which pledged to uphold the
territorial integrity of Ukraine in the Budapest memorandum signed in
1994. This treaty (or Executive agreement\#In the United
States|"executive agreement" for purposes of US law), was also signed by
the United States, United Kingdom, and France. Ukraine revoked the
Crimean constitution and abolished the office of Crimean President in
1995. Crimea would gain a new constitution in 1998 that granted the
Crimean parliament lesser powers than the previous constitution,
including no legislative initiative. Crimean officials would later seek
to restore the powers of the previous constitution.

The further developments in Crimea and the future of the Russian naval
base in Sevastopol there have been a point of contention in
Russian-Ukrainian relations. Under the now defunct Russian-Ukrainian
Partition Treaty determining the fate of the military bases and vessels
in Crimea – signed in 1997 and prolonged in 2010 - Russia was allowed to
have up to 25,000 troops, 24 artillery systems (with a caliber smaller
than 100 mm), 132 armored vehicles, and 22 military planes, on the
Crimean peninsula. The Russian Black Sea fleet was given basing rights
in Crimea until 2042. Moscow annually wrote off \$97.75 million of
Kiev’s debt in return for the right to use Ukrainian waters and radio
frequencies, and to compensate for the Black Sea Fleet’s environmental
impact.

According to the 2001 census, ethnic Russians make up about 58% of the
two million residents of Crimea. In Sevastopol, which houses a base for
the Russian Navy's Black Sea Fleet, ethnic Russians make up 70% of the
city's population of 340,000. Ukrainians make up 24% of the Crimean
population, while 12% are Crimean Tatars. Ethnic Russians did not become
the largest population group in Crimea until the 20th century, after
Soviet leader Joseph Stalin ordered the deportation of the Crimean
Tatars in 1944 for alleged collaboration with Nazi invaders in World War
Two. Crimean Tatars were not permitted to return to Crimea after their
deportation in 1944, and became an international cause célèbre, until
the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. The continuing return of
Crimean Tatars to their homeland in Crimea since the Soviet collapse has
caused persistent tensions with the Russian population of the peninsula.
A news report claimed pro-Russian forces marking "X" on the doors of
houses of Crimean Tatars. The leader of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar
People Refat Chubarov protested against the intervention of Russia.

In the 2010 local parliamentary elections, the Party of Regions received
357,030 votes, while the second-placed Ukrainian Communist Party
received 54,172 votes. Both parties were targeted by protesters during
the 2014 Ukrainian revolution.

In July 2011, Yuriy Olexandrovich Meshkov the former president of Crimea
(1994–95) called for a referendum on restoring the 1992 version of the
Constitution of Crimea. The District Administrative Court of Crimea
responded by deporting Meshkov from Ukraine for a period of 5 years.

According to the International Centre for Defense Studies, since the
Orange Revolution in 2004, Russia has pressured Ukraine for its
preferences to associate itself with the West. It has been stated that
the information campaign in Crimea has become especially proficient and
systematic, becoming particularly intense during the 2006–08 Ukraine bid
for NATO membership. Each of Ukraine's attempts to achieve European
integration has led to increased Russian hostility to the idea via its
use of information campaign. Russia opposes Ukrainian integration with
the West for various reasons, including a fear of NATO expanding to
Russia's Western borders and Russia's claimed desire to include Ukraine
in an Eurasian Union.

According to Taras Kuzio, during the Viktor Yushchenko presidency
(2005–2010), Russia's relations with Ukraine deteriorated, prompting the
Russian security service (FSB) and Russian military intelligence (GRU)
to expand their covert support for pro-Russian forces in Southern
Ukraine and Russian separatists in Crimea. Following the Orange
Revolution and the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, American diplomatic cables
leaked to the public noted that Russian military action against Ukraine
was "no longer unthinkable."

### Revolution in Kiev

Towards the end of 2013, Euromaidan protests began after President
Viktor Yanukovych postponed the signing of Ukraine–European Union
Association Agreement under severe economic pressure from Russia, even
though previously he had considered this agreement one of his key
objectives and stated it on multiple occasions. Instead, Yanukovych
struck a deal with Putin which meant, among other things, that Russia
would buy \$15 billion in Ukrainian bonds, and discount gas prices to
Ukraine by one-third. Opposition leaders were suspicious of the true
cost to Ukraine for Russian support.

The protests took an anti-government turn and escalated in early 2014
and eventually led to deaths of both protesters and police on January 22
and between February 18 and February 20. 103 people were killed and 1419
injured.. According to most reports in Ukraine, violence was used mostly
by the police. Numerous snipers killed tens of protesters. The snipers'
identity is still disputed. According to the opposition and the majority
of Ukrainian and Western media, they were hired by Yanukovych's circle
and/or the Russian secret services, which had also planned a much larger
military operation to 'cleanse' protesters However, in an interview
given to the Russian media, the former chief of Ukraine’s Security
Service accused the leaders of the opposition of hiring the snipers.
President Yanukovych and the opposition leaders signed a compromise deal
on February 21 that was brokered by the foreign ministers of France,
Poland and Germany, but it soon became redundant as Yanukovych left the
capital, government forces withdrew, and protesters took control of the
city without resistance. According to the deal, the Verkhovna Rada was
obliged to adopt a bill about the constitutional reform and Yanukovych
was obliged to sign it within 48 hours. The bill was adopted, but
Yanukovych didn't sign it. On February 21, Yanukovych fled Kiev.
Evidence shows that Yanukovych had started to prepare his leave on
February 19, removing goods and riches. The guards of Yanukovych's
residence opened it to the protesters. The protesters found vast
evidence of Yanukovych's unprecedented corruption in his residence. The
Rada impeached Yanukovych, but not according to the constitutional
procedure. Even though the decision was not constitutional, it was
supported by the vast majority in the Ukrainian parliament. According to
the opposition leaders, they had no other choice, because, as they see
it, Yanukovych was involved in mass murder, had usurped power, including
the judicial system, and disregarded and violated the Constitution and
other laws many times. Members of the opposition appointed Oleksandr
Turchinov as the new speaker of Verkhovna Rada and also appointed him as
the interim President. The Rada set May 25 for a new presidential
election. A new Council of Ministers was elected on February 27. Russia
refused to recognize the new authorities in Kiev, saying that they had
come to power through armed insurrection by extreme-right political
forces and unconstitutional methods. The United States and European
Union immediately recognized the government in Kiev.

Some residents of the eastern and southern parts of the country, which
are primarily Russian-speaking and constitute President Yanukovych's
support base, felt disenfranchised by these developments and protested
against the government in Kiev. The Parliament of Crimea called for an
extraordinary session on 21 February. The leader of the Mejlis of the
Crimean Tatar People Refat Chubarov stated that he suspected that the
session might ask for Russian military intervention.

On February 21, the Security Service of Ukraine (SBU) issued a statement
which promised that "it will use severe measures to prevent any action
taken against diminishing the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Ukraine." The same day the pro-Russian Party of Regions who held 80 of
the 100 seats in the Crimean Parliament, did not discuss issues relating
to the separation of Crimea from Ukraine and appeared to support the
deal struck between President Yanukovich and the opposition to end the
crises signed the same day.

On February 23, the Ukrainian parliament adopted a bill to repeal the
law on minority languages, which—if signed by the Ukrainian
President—would have established Ukrainian as the sole official state
language of all Ukraine, including Crimea which is populated by a
Russian-speaking majority. *The Christian Science Monitor* reported:
"The [adoption of this bill] only served to infuriate Russian-speaking
regions, [who] saw the move as more evidence that the antigovernment
protests in Kiev that toppled Yanukovich's government were intent on
pressing for a nationalistic agenda." A few days later, on March 1,
2014, the acting President of Ukraine, Oleksandr Turchynov, vetoed the
bill effectively stopping its enactment. However on March 11 the newly
installed Ukrainian authorities demanded that Russian language TV and
Radio channels be shut down, a move that the OSCE slammed as repressive
censorship.

The Kharkiv Human Rights Protection Group and the Ukrainian Helsinki
Human Rights Union have both denied any human rights violations against
Russian speakers in Ukraine that would justify Russia's actions.

### Legal aspects

The Russian-Ukrainian Partition Treaty on the Status and Conditions of
the Black Sea Fleet signed in 1997 and prolonged in 2010, determined the
status of the military bases and vessels in Crimea prior to the current
crisis. Russia was allowed to maintain up to 25,000 troops, 24 artillery
systems (with a caliber smaller than 100 mm), 132 armored vehicles, and
22 military planes, on the Crimean Peninsula and Sevastopol. The Russian
Black Sea fleet had basing rights in Crimea until 2042. However it is
controversial if the recent troop movements were covered by the treaty.

Both Russia and Ukraine are signatories to the Charter of the United
Nations. The ratification of said charter has several ramifications in
terms of international law, particularly those that cover the subjects
of sovereignty, self-determination, acts of aggression, and humanitarian
emergencies. Vladimir Putin on one hand, claims that the Russian
intervention on Ukraine is for humanitarian purposes. Ukraine and other
nations, on the other hand, argue that such intervention is a violation
of Ukraine's sovereignty. Russia claims that its armed forces are not
involved in the present stand-off, and also asserts that use of force
for the purposes of humanitarian intervention in Ukraine has not yet
occurred.

Timeline
--------

Ukrainian victims of kidnapping
-------------------------------

On March 18, there were reports of at least 14 people being held
hostage, the fates of whom are not known. On March 19, the acting
President of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov issued an ultimatum to the
Crimean authorities to release all the hostages. The Minister of Defense
of the Russian Federation General of the Army Sergei Shoigu asked the
Crimean authorities to release the Ukrainian Navy commander Rear Admiral
Serhiy Haiduk. All accounted hostages were released on March 20. One of
the hostages had their legs shot through. On March 21, Krym SOS reported
that the location of at least nine more people is not known.

### Missing in action

-   Stanislav Polishchuk (activist) - circumstances unknown
-   Ivan Bondarets (Euromaidan activist) - disappeared around March 14
-   Valeriy Vashchuk (Euromaidan activist) - disappeared around March 14
-   Lt.Colonel Oleksandr Kalyan (long-range aviation detachment) -
    disappeared after the assault
-   Ivan Nikolus (chief of Border Guard Post in Pryvitne)
-   Vladyslav Nechyporenko (officer)
-   Oleksandr Filipov (officer)
-   Colonel Yuliy Mamchur - taken hostage on March 22, 2014 after the
    assault of the Russian Spetsnaz on the Ukrainian Belbek Military
    Airport.

### Released

-   Colonel Ihor Losnikov (Foreign Intelligence Service) - kidnapped and
    later released.
-   Colonel Andriy Andriushyn - kidnapped on March 18, 2014 and is being
    forced to defect (released March 20)
-   Andriy Shchekun (leader of the Ukrainian community in Crimea) -
    kidnapped on March 4, 2014 (released March 20).
-   Anatoliy Kovalsky (leader of the Ukrainian community in Crimea) -
    kidnapped on March 4, 2014 (released March 20)
-   Oleksiy Hrytsenko (leader of the Automaidan) - taken hostage
    (released March 20)
-   Walid Abu Yusuf (Sergei Selentsov) - kidnapped (released March 20)
-   Rear Admiral Serhiy Haiduk (Ukrainian Navy commander) - kidnapped
    after the raid of the Navy headquarters on March 19, 2014 (released
    March 20)
-   Yaroslav Pylunsky (known cameraman and film director) - kidnapped on
    March 16 (released March 21)
-   Yuriy Hruzynov (cameraman) - kidnapped on March 16 (released March
    21)

### Known killed hostages

-   Reshat Ametov (38 years old) - kidnapped by the Crimean
    self-defense, later was found dead with signs of torture.

Repatriation of non-Russian nationalities
-----------------------------------------

-   On March 21, 2014, Mustafa Dzhemilev was announced a persona non
    grata by the government of Crimea.
-   On March 22, 2014 a native of Crimea Shchekun reported that he was
    tortured by electric stream, while being held hostage.

Other (non-Russian) involvement
-------------------------------

On March 2, 2014, Pavel Chernev, former member of the nationalist Attack
party and current political secretary of "Orthodox Dawn" (, *Pravoslavna
Zora*) who is known for his pro-Putin views, revealed that the Bulgarian
branch of the organization will be sending a group of Bulgarian
volunteers to "protect ethnic Russians and ethnic Bulgarians from
forceful Ukrainization". Chernev also claimed that they had already
sponsored "tens of Orthodox fighters" (non-Bulgarian) to fly to Moscow
and Crimea. Simeon Kostadinov, another former Attack member, currently
representing the Nationalist Party in Bulgaria, and Chernev clarified
that their mission has peaceful intentions, but will be prepared to give
a good account of themselves in the unfortunate event of an escalation.
Their contention is that the old regime was preferable from the
standpoint of the Bulgarian minority in Ukraine and the new authorities
lack legitimacy. Another small "international group based on the
Pyrenean Peninsula" which includes some Bulgarians and is supported by a
Russian paramilitary organization was reported to have left for Ukraine
on March 3. "Orthodox Dawn" have displayed an interest in securing the
backing of international actors for the 2014 referendum in Crimea and
will try to recruit foreign election observers. According to Bulgarian
sources, drawing on reports made by Al Jazeera, 20 Bulgarian nationals
are presently in Crimea. They are part of the paramilitary formation
Dobrovolets/Доброволец, which is under the control of Russian troops.
Dobrovolets' area of operations also intends to include Odessa and
Donetsk. Chernev stated that he will be visiting Crimea on March 15 and
guarantees that all the participants in the mission have undergone
thorough screening to ensure that people with criminal convictions are
weeded out. Anton Kisse, the only deputy in the Verkhovna Rada with
Bulgarian roots has spoken out against any foreign interventions stating
that "even the friendliest foreign state has no right to impose its
vision of what constitutes proper order on Ukraine" and that "people
will turn to Bulgaria if the need arises". Chernev was one of the
election observers for the 2014 referendum in Crimea, on the invitation
of Sergey Aksyonov.

A very small group of Chetniks, a Serbian nationalist paramilitary
force, have travelled to Crimea to support Russia. Serbian and Russian
nationalists share Slavic and Orthodox culture and anti-Western
sentiment, and Chetniks claim to be in Russia's favour for support
during the Yugoslav Wars. The Chetniks are based in an Orthodox
monastery. Their commanders Bratislav Jivković and Milutin Malisić have
participated in previous armed conflicts - Jivković in the Bosnian War
as part of the Serb Volunteer Guard while Malisić has been involved in
the protection of the Serbian minority in Kosovo in the aftermath of the
Kosovo War. Malisić has reiterated that his paramilitary formation is
committed to peace and does not want to shed the blood of fellow Slavs,
viewing Ukrainians and Russians as brotherly ethnicities.

Aftermath
---------

As a result of the crisis, the two leading indexes of the Moscow
Exchange fell in trading on March 3: the MICEX 10 declined 10.79
percent, equating to a loss in market capitalization of nearly \$60
billion, and the RTS Index declined 12.01 percent to its lowest level
since September 2009. The next day, though, the MICEX rose 5.25%,
recovering part of the losses. In response to this and the decline of
the ruble, the Central Bank of Russia raised its interest rate from 5.5
to 7.0% and spent up to US\$12 billion in reserves to bolster the
currency. The possibility for international sanctions against Russia has
also been raised.

There are worries that Russian gas exports into Europe and Ukraine may
become disrupted by the current conflict. Thirty percent of Europe's gas
is imported from Russia, half of which flows through Ukrainian
pipelines. On March 1, Russian Energy Ministry decided to halt the
subsidies of Russian gas for Ukraine. The crisis could also affect
worldwide grain supplies. Prices will likely rise because Ukraine is one
of the world's largest exporters of corn.

### Sanctions

Sanctions were imposed to prevent Russian and Crimean officials and
politicians traveling to Canada, the United States, and the European
Union. They were the most wide-ranging used on Russia since the 1991
fall of the Soviet Union.

  Nationality   Name                     Sanctioned by Canada   Sanctioned by the E.U.   Sanctioned by the U.S.   Remarks
  ------------- ------------------------ ---------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Russia        Aleksandr Galkin                                                                                  commander of Southern Military District
  Russia        Aleksandr Totoonov                                                                                Member of the Committee on Culture, Science, and Information, Federation Council of Russia.
  Russia        Aleksandr Vitko                                                                                   commander of the Black Sea Fleet
  Sevastopol    Aleksei Chaliy                                                                                    chief of the executive committee of the Sevastopol City Council
                Anatoliy Sidorov                                                                                  
  Russia        Andrei Klishas                                                                                    
  Ukraine       Denis Berezovsky                                                                                  defected commander of the Ukrainian Navy
  Russia        Dmitry Rogozin                                                                                    
                Evgeny Bushmin                                                                                    
  Russia        Leonid Slutsky                                                                                    
  Russia        Nikolai Ryzhkov                                                                                   member of the Federation Council
                Oleg Panteleev                                                                                    
                Pyotr Zima                                                                                        
  Crimea        Rustam Temirgaliev                                                                                Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Crimea
  Crimea        Sergey Aksyonov                                                                                   *de facto* Prime Minister of Crimea
  Russia        Sergey Glazyev                                                                                    
  Russia        Sergey Mironov                                                                                    leader of the Russian Parliament faction A Just Russia
                Sergey Tsekov                                                                                     
                Sergey Zheleznyak                                                                                 
  Russia        Valentina Matviyenko                                                                              Chairman of the Federation Council
                Victor Ozerov                                                                                     
  Ukraine       Viktor Medvedchuk                                                                                 Ukrainian oligarch
  Ukraine       Viktor Yanukovych                                                                                 ousted President of Ukraine
                Vladimir Dzhabarov                                                                                
  Russia        Vladislav Surkov                                                                                  close ally to Vladimir Putin
  Ukraine       Volodymyr Konstantynov                                                                            Chairman of the Crimean Parliament
  Russia        Yelena Mizulina                                                                                   member of the State Duma and the A Just Russia party
                Yuriy Zherebtsov                                                                                  

Japan announced milder sanctions than the US and EU. These include
suspension of talks relating to military, space, investment, and visa
requirements.

In response to the sanctions introduced by the U.S. and EU, the Russian
Duma unanimously passed a resolution asking for all members of the Duma
to be included on the sanctions list. Head of the opposition A Just
Russia party Sergei Mironov said he was proud of being included on the
sanctions list, "It is with pride that I have found myself on the black
list, this means they have noticed my stance on Crimea."

Three days after the lists were published, the Russian Foreign Ministry
published a reciprocal sanctions list of US citizens, which consisted of
10 names, including House of Representatives Speaker John Boehner,
Senator John McCain, and two advisers to President Obama. The ministry
said in the statement, "Treating our country in such way, as Washington
could have already ascertained, is inappropriate and counterproductive,"
and reiterated that sanctions against Russia would have a boomerang
effect.

According to the *Financial Times* on Friday, March 21, "As recently as
the start of the week, some of Moscow's financial elite were blasé about
the prospect of sanctions. But Russia's businessmen were no longer
smiling by [… the end of it] after expanded US sanctions rippled through
financial markets hitting the business interests of some of the
country's richest people." The Americans centered on the heart of
Moscow's leadership, though the EU initial list shied from targeting
Putin's inner circle. As ratings agencies Fitch and Standard & Poor's
downgraded Russia's credit outlook, Russian banks warned of a
sanctions-induced recession, and the country braced for capital outflows
for the first three months of 2014 to reach \$70 billion, Novatek,
Russia's second-largest gas producer, saw \$2.5bn in market value wiped
out when its shares sank by nearly 10%, rendering Putin's close friend
Gennady Timchenko, who has a 23% stake in the company, \$575m poorer. "I
do hope that there is some serious diplomatic activity going on behind
the scenes," said one Russian banker quoted by the newspaper, though
others were more sanguine on the question of whether the sanctions would
have any enduring effect, and Russians, top and bottom, seemed defiant.
The official Russian response was mixed.

### Sports events

The game of the 21st round of the 2013-14 Ukrainian Premier League on
March 15, 2014 between SC Tavriya Simferopol and FC Dynamo Kyiv was
forced to take place in Kiev at NSC Olimpiysky instead of the Lokomotiv
RSC in Simferopol.

Reactions
---------

### Ukraine

Three ex‐presidents of Ukraine accused Russia of interfering in Crimean
affairs. Interim president Oleksandr Turchynov at the start of the
protests warned that there is a "serious risk" of separatism in parts of
the country. On February 27, 2014, the Central Election Commission of
Ukraine claimed that regional referendum is impossible due to lack of
necessary legislative basis for such. On February 27, 2014, the Chairman
of the Verkhovna Rada Oleksandr Turchynov was instructed to develop a
new law "about language". On February 28, a freelance journalist wrote
on Twitter that President Yanukovych said that any military actions are
unacceptable and he will not ask Russia for it. According to President
Yanukovych he believed that Crimea must remain part of Ukraine.

The new Prime Minister of Ukraine Arseniy Yatsenyuk stated in his maiden
speech on February 27 that "Ukraine will use all legal constitutional
methods to preserve the territorial integrity of the state. Crimea was,
is and will be a part of Ukraine!".

On February 27, the MFA of Ukraine, in response to the MID statement,
stated that the responsibility for non-compliance with the agreement on
settlement of the crisis lies on President Viktor Yanukovych. "In
Ukraine, the importance of the crisis settlement Agreement, signed on
February 21, 2014 by the lawful President of Ukraine and opposition
leaders, and witnessed by officials of Germany, France and Poland, is
honoured. In this regard, we express disappointment that the
representative of the Russian Federation, who also participated in the
negotiation and drafting of the document, refused to testify this
Agreement. It is possible that it was that factor that become at the end
one of the reasons for the rejection by the lawfully elected President
of Ukraine to fulfill arrangements of the Agreement aimed at stabilizing
the domestic life in the country," – said in the document.

On February 28, the Verkhovna Rada adopted a resolution on events in
Crimea: "Verkhovna Rada demands from the Russian Federation to stop
steps that have signs of encroachment on state sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine, including to refuse supporting
separatism in Ukraine in any form".

The Chairman of the Verkhovna Rada Oleksandr Turchynov dismissed Yuriy
Ilyin as the Chief of the General Staff. During the 2014 Ukrainian
Revolution Ilyin was reportedly preparing a military operation against
the protest movement in Kiev. Ilyin reportedly had a heart attack after
meeting with the newly appointed mayor of Sevastopol.

Due to the events in Crimea, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine
initiated bilateral consultations with Russia and indicated its
readiness to initiate consultations within the Budapest Memorandum on
Security Assurances framework if it receives no response.

The General Prosecutor office intended to raise the issue of the
extradition of Viktor Yanukovych, who was confirmed to be in Russia. On
February 28, foreign observers speculated that Russia could extradite
Yanukovych to the proper authorities only in exchange for Ukrainian
non-intervention in Crimea. On February 28, the General Prosecutor of
Ukraine Oleh Makhnitsky formally asked Russia to extradite Yanukovych.

On February 28, Dmytro Yarosh, the leader of the Right Sector, denounced
reports of Right Sector putting together armed units to be sent to
Crimea; "Right Sector hopes that a way out of this difficult situation
will be found exclusively in the political field, without using forcible
methods. Right Sector believes that all parties and non-governmental
organizations of Ukraine should forget strife and unite when it comes to
the preservation of Ukraine's integrity. We should help politicians in
settling this conflict peacefully". On March 1, initial reports said
that Dmytro Yarosh asked Dokka Umarov, a Chechen militant associated
with al-Qaeda, for support of Ukraine; but later it was announced that
this was a fake statement from his hacked account.

On March 1, the acting president of Ukraine signed an edict in which he
pointed out that appointment of Sergey Aksyonov as the Chairman of the
Councils of Ministers of Crimea was in violation of the Constitution of
Ukraine and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. The incumbent and two
former presidents of Ukraine – Leonid Kravchuk, Leonid Kuchma and Viktor
Yushchenko—called on Ukraine to renounce the Kharkiv Agreements. Leonid
Kuchma's press-center later denounced such a statement on behalf of
Leonid Kuchma. The acting President of Ukraine purportedly ordered the
Armed Forces of Ukraine to full combat readiness. The Oblast council of
Luhansk Oblast voted to demand giving Russian language the status of
second official language, stopping ″persecution of Berkut fighters″,
disarming Maidan self-defense units and banning a number of far-right
political organizations like Svoboda and UNA-UNSO. In the case of the
authorities failing to comply with the demands, the Oblast council
reserved itself the ″right to ask for help from the brotherly people of
the Russian Federation.″

The General Prosecutor of Ukraine filed new charges against the
President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych, accusing him, among other
charges, of calls to overthrow the constitutional order in Ukraine.

On March 4, the district administration court of Kiev cancelled the
decision of the council concerning a no confidence vote to the Council
of Ministers of Crimea and the appointment of Aksyonov as a chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Crimea as well as declared illegal
organization and conduct of a local referendum on improving the status
and powers of autonomy.

On March 17, Ukraine recalled its ambassador Volodymyr Yelchenko from
the Russian Federation officially to discuss the situation about Crimea.

On March 18, video footage emerged of National Television Company of
Ukraine (NTU) CEO Oleksandr Panteleymonov being physically assaulted and
forced to resign by Svoboda members of the Ukrainian parliament,
including the deputy head of Ukraine's "committee on freedom of speech".
Svoboda filmed the attack and posted it online. On March 19, Ukraine are
drawing plans to withdraw all their soldiers and their families to
mainland Ukraine from Crimea "Quickly and Efficiently".

Former President Viktor Yuschenko believes that the formerly imprisoned
ex-Prime Minister and fierce political rival Yulia Tymoshenko "cut a
deal" with Russian President Vladimir Putin, which saw Ukraine give
Crimea to Russia in exchange for Russia securing Tymoshenko's early
release from prison. Yushchenko said it is "quite strange" that
Ukraine's Tymoshenko-dominated government has done nothing to secure the
Crimean electricity and water infrastructure on the mainland, in
addition to failing to stop "Russian agitators" from going to Donetsk
and Kharkov. Tymoshenko dismissed the charges as "anti-Ukrainian
propaganda."

On March 25, Ukraine fired its defense minister, Igor Tenyukh, who was
accused of being indecisive and slow to give orders to Ukrainian
military units in Crimea. He resigned and was replaced by General
Mykhaylo Koval, who had served with the border guards in Crimea and was
briefly kidnapped there in March . Ukrainian Secretary of the National
Security and Defense Council Andriy Parubiy stated in an interview that
"Mistakes have been and will be made, but the new government is not
afraid to fix them."

Former Ukrainian PM Yulia Tymoshenko, who rose to power as a key figure
in the pro-US/European Orange Revolution in 2004, becoming Ukrainian
prime minister 2007-2010, was released from prison immediately after the
Kiev coup which ousted Yanukovich. In a leaked phone conversation with
Nestor Shufrych, former deputy secretary of the National Security and
Defense Council of Ukraine said in reference to the reunification of
Crimea with Russia “This is really beyond all boundaries. It’s about
time we grab our guns and kill go kill those damn Russians together with
their leader.”

The Ukrainian National Council for TV and Radio Broadcasting instructed
all cable operators on 11 March to stop transmitting a number of Russian
channels, including the international versions of the main
state-controlled stations Rossiya 1, Channel One and NTV, as well as
news channel Rossiya 24.

#### Viktor Yanukovych

Late at night on February 27, the ex-President of Ukraine, Viktor
Yanukovych, who is wanted along with Zakharchenko under suspicion of
mass killing of people, arrived in Rostov-on-Don escorted by jet
fighters. On February 28, he conducted a press-conference. In this press
conference Yanukovych stated "Crimea must remain part of the Ukrainian
state retaining broad autonomy rights". According to him the unrest in
Crimea was "an absolutely natural reaction to the bandit coup that has
occurred in Kiev"; and he stated he was confident that the people of
Crimea "do not want to obey and will not obey nationalists and bandits".
He insisted that military action was "unacceptable" and that he would
not request Russian military intervention. Still on March 4, 2014,
Russia's Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Vitaly Churkin
showed a photocopy of the letter allegedly signed by Victor Yanukovich
on March 1, 2014 where he demanded Russian military intervention in
Ukraine.

On March 11, Yanukovych vowed to return to Ukraine, calling upon the
Ukrainian Armed Forces to not follow the "criminal orders" of the acting
government in Kiev. Yanukovych attacked the acting government in Ukraine
as being a "band of ultranationalists and neo-fascists" that have
replaced his government, and criticized their supposed Western backers.

### Autonomous Republic

Operations of the Kerch Strait ferry were suspended on February 27,
2014. The Ukrainians in Crimea called on Ukrainian officials to secure
peace and security for Crimeans and for European officials to influence
the Russian position in regards to separatist attitudes. The new
chairman of the Council of Ministers hopes to receive financial help
from the Russian Federation with support from Viktor Yanukovych. In the
telephone conversation Volodymyr Konstantinov explained to Nestor
Shufrych (MP) that Crimea does not want a secession, but only to expand
its right. The former chief of the general staff Yuriy Ilyin was
reported to be hospitalized with a heart attack in the Ukrainian Navy
hospital in Sevastopol.

Members of the Crimean government have declared their acceptance of
Yanukovych as the legitimate President of Ukraine, deputy chairman of
the Crimean parliament Konstantin Bakharev has said: "Today, Yanukovych
is the legitimate president," though he also addressed issues concerning
him saying, "But we have questions for him, questions as the leader of
the government about his moral responsibility before the society, before
the party he once led, and before Crimeans."

About one thousand residents of Crimea, mainly Crimean Tatars, have left
Crimea for Ukraine.

Party of Regions MP Yuriy Miroshnychenko urged the Crimean government to
stop the referendum. Another Party of Regions MP, Hanna Herman,
commented the same day about Yanukovych's press conference, "He needs to
... prevent the illegal referendum."

### Russia

The State Duma Committee on Commonwealth of Independent States Affairs,
headed by Leonid Slutsky, visited Simferopol on February 25, 2014 and
said: "If the parliament of the Crimean autonomy or its residents
express the wish to join the Russian Federation, Russia will be prepared
to consider this sort of application. We will be examining the situation
and doing so fast." They also stated that in the event of a referendum
for Crimea region joining Russian Federation they would consider its
results "very fast". Later Slutsky announced that he was misunderstood
by Crimean press and no decision regarding simplifying the process of
acquiring Russian citizenship for people in Crimea has been made yet.
And added that if "fellow Russian citizens are in jeopardy you
understand that we do not stay away". On February 25, in a meeting with
Crimean politicians he stated that Viktor Yanukovich was still the
legitimate president of Ukraine. That same day in the Russian Duma, they
announced they were determining measures so that Russians in Ukraine who
'did not want to break from the Russian World' could acquire Russian
citizenship.

On February 26, Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the Russian
Armed Forces to be "put on alert in the Western Military District as
well as units stationed with the 2nd Army Central Military District
Command involved in aerospace defense, airborne troops and long-range
military transport." Despite media speculation it was for in reaction to
the events in Ukraine Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu said it was
in separate consideration from the unrest in Ukraine. On February 27,
2014, the Russian government dismissed accusations about violation by
the Russian side of the basic agreements in regards of the Black Sea
Fleet: "All movements of armored vehicles are undertaken in full
compliance with the basic agreements and did not require any approvals".

On February 27, the Russian governing agencies presented the new law
project on granting citizenship.

The Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs called on the West and
particularly NATO to "abandon the provocative statements and respect the
neutral status of Ukraine". In its statement the ministry claims that
agreement on settlement of the crisis which was signed on 21 February
and was witnessed by foreign ministries from Germany, Poland and France
has to this date, not been implemented (Vladimir Lukin from Russia had
not signed it).

According to ITAR-TASS on February 28 the Russian Ministry of Transport
discontinued its further talks with Ukraine in regards to the Kerch
Strait Bridge project. However, on 3 March Dmitry Medvedev, the Prime
Minister of Russia, signed a decree creating a subsidiary of Russian
Highways (Avtodor) to build a bridge at an unspecified location along
the Kerch strait.

On Russian social networks there is a movement to gather volunteers who
served in the Russian army to go to Ukraine.

On February 28 President Putin stated it was of "extreme importance of
not allowing a further escalation of violence and the necessity of a
rapid normalisation of the situation in Ukraine" in telephone calls with
key EU leaders. Already on 19 February the Russian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs referred to the Euromaidan revolution as the "Brown revolution".

The Federation Council approved that Russia may introduce a limited
contingent of Russian troops in Crimea for the security of the Black Sea
Fleet and the Russians.

In Moscow, on March 2, an estimated 27,000 rallied in support of the
Russian government's decision to intervene in Ukraine. Up to 15,000
participated in a similar rally in St. Petersburg, while around 12,000
rallied in Krasnodar. The rallies received considerable attention on
Russian state TV and were officially sanctioned by the government.

Meanwhile, on March 1, five people who were picketing next to the
Federation Council building against the invasion of Ukraine were
arrested. The next day about 200 people protested at the building of the
Russian Ministry of Defense in Moscow against Russian military
involvement. About 500 people also gathered to protest on the Manezhnaya
Square in Moscow and the same number of people on the Saint Isaac's
Square in Saint Petersburg. On March 2, about eleven protesters
demonstrated in Yekaterinburg against Russian involvement, with some
wrapped in the Ukrainian flag. Protests were also held in Chelyabinsk on
the same day. The opposition to the military intervention was also
expressed by rock musician Andrey Makarevich, who wrote in particular:
"You want war with Ukraine? It will not be the way it was with Abkhazia:
the folks on the Maidan have been hardened and know what they are
fighting for – for their country, their independence. [...] We have to
live with them. Still neighborly. And preferably in friendship. But it's
up to them how they want to live". The Professor of the Department of
Philosophy at the Moscow State Institute of International Relations
Andrey Zubov was fired for his article in *Vedomosti*, criticizing
Russian military intervention.

President Putin's approval rating among the Russian public has increased
by nearly 10% since the crisis began, up to 71.6%, the highest in three
years, according to a poll conducted by the All-Russian Center for
Public Opinion Research, released on March 19. Additionally, the same
poll showed that more than 90% of Russians supported unification with
the Crimean Republic.

On March 4, at press conference in Novo-Ogaryovo President Putin
expressed his view on the situation that if a revolution took place in
Ukraine, it is a new country with which Russia did not conclude any
treaties. He brought up an analogy with events of 1917 in Russia, when
as a result of the revolution the Russian Empire fell apart and a new
state was created. However, he stated Ukraine would still have to honor
its debts.

Russian politicians have speculated that there are already 143,000
Ukrainian refugees in Russia. The Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
refuted those claims of refugees increase in Russia. At a briefing on
March 4, 2014, the director of department of information policy of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine Yevhen Perebiynis claimed that
Russia was misinforming its own citizens as well as the entire
international community to justify its own actions in the Crimea.

On March 5, an anchor of the Russian-owned international news channel RT
America, Abby Martin, in an interview with Piers Morgan, said she "did
not agree" with how her employer RT was covering the Ukrainian crisis,
but claims RT still supports her despite her differences of opinion.
Also on March 5, 2014, another RT America anchor, Liz Wahl, of the
network's Washington, DC bureau, resigned on air, explaining that she
could not be "part of a network that whitewashes the actions of Putin"
and citing her Hungarian ancestry and the memory of the Soviet
repression of the Hungarian Uprising as a factor in her decision.

Prominent dissident Mikhail Khodorkovsky said that Crimea should stay
within Ukraine with broader autonomy.

Tatarstan, a republic within Russia populated by Volga Tatars, has
sought to alleviate concerns about treatment of Tatars by Russia, as
Tatarstan is a gas-rich and economically successful republic in Russia.
On March 5, President of Tatarstan Rustam Minnikhanov signed an
agreement on cooperation between Tatarstan and the Aksyonov government
in Crimea that implied collaboration between ten government institutions
as well as significant financial aid to Crimea from Tatarstan
businesses. On March 11, Minnikhanov was in Crimea on his second visit
and attended as a guest present in the Crimean parliament chamber during
the vote on the declaration of sovereignty pending the March 16
referendum. The Tatarstan's Mufti Kamil Samigullin invited Crimean
Tatars to study in madrasas in Kazan and declared support for their
"brothers in faith and blood". Recently Mustafa Dzhemilev, a former
leader of the Crimean Tatar Majlis, has declared that he is satisfied by
Putin's reassurances to him on the safety of the Crimean Tatar
community, changing his stance after earlier refusing to meet with
Putin. Dzhemilev believes that forces that are suspected to be Russian
forces should leave the Crimean peninsula.

On March 15, 50,000 protesters in Russia marched against Russian
involvement in Ukraine, many waving Ukrainian flags.

### International

[[<File:Crimea> reaction clean.png|thumb|300px|right|International
reaction to the 2014 Crimean crisis according to official governmental
statements.

* * * * *

* * * * *

* * * * *

]]

International reaction have called for restraint and urged a quick and
peaceful resolution to the crisis. The United States government has
imposed sanctions against persons they deem to have violated or assisted
in the violation of Ukraine's sovereignty. The European Union has
suspended talks with Russia on economic and visa related matters; and is
considering more stringent sanctions against Russia in the near future,
including asset freezes. The EU Commission decided on March 11 to enter
into a full free-trade agreement with Ukraine this year. On March 12,
the European Parliament rejected the upcoming referendum on independence
in Crimea, which they saw as manipulated and contrary to international
and Ukrainian law. The United Nations Security Council has held three
emergency sessions since February 28. The G7 bloc of developed nations
(the G8 minus Russia) made a joint statement condemning Russia and
announced that they will suspend preparations for the upcoming G8 summit
in Sochi in June. The Visegrád Group has issued a joint statement urging
Russia to respect Ukraine's territorial integrity and for Ukraine to
take into account its minority groups to not further break fragile
relations. It has urged for Russia to respect Ukrainian and
international law and in line with the provisions of the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum.

China said "We respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine". A spokesman restated China's belief of
non-interference in the internal affairs of other nations and urged
dialogue.

National Security Advisor Shivshankar Menon of India stated that Russia
has legitimate interests in Crimea and called for "sustained diplomatic
efforts" and "constructive dialogue" to resolve the crisis. However, the
National Security Advisor is not a part of the Cabinet of India and, as
such, Menon's statement was not an official statement issued by the
government of India. However, India subsequently made it clear that it
will not support any "unilateral measures" against Russian government.
"India has never supported unilateral sanctions against any country.
Therefore, we will also not support any unilateral measures by a country
or a group of countries against Russia." Both Syria and Venezuela openly
support Russian military action. Syrian President Bashar al Assad said
that he supports Putin's efforts to "restore security and stability in
the friendly country of Ukraine", while Venezuelan President Nicolas
Maduro condemned Ukraine's "ultra-nationalist" coup. Sri Lanka described
Yanukovych's removal as unconstitutional and considered Russia's
concerns in Crimea as justified.

Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk called for change in EU energy policy
as Germany's dependence on Russian gas poses risks for Europe.

On March 13, German Chancellor Angela Merkel warned Moscow it risks
massive damage to Russia, economically and politically, if it refuses to
change course on Ukraine, though close economic links between Germany
and Russia significantly reduce the scope for Berlin to sanction the
Eurasian giant.

After Russia moved to formally incorporate Crimea, some worried whether
it may not do the same in other regions. US deputy national security
advisor Tony Blinken said that the Russian troops massed on the eastern
Ukrainian border may be preparing to enter the country's eastern
regions. Russian officials stated that Russian troops would not enter
other areas. US Air Force Gen. Philip M. Breedlove, NATO's supreme
allied commander in Europe, warned that the same troops were in a
position to take over the separatist Russian-speaking Moldovan province
of Transnistria.

#### Ukraine's territorial integrity

Partitioning Ukraine has been advocated by some commentators such as
Crispin Black and Professor Ethan S. Burger of Georgetown University.
Many others have opposed it, as do most governments. Many media outlets
have discussed the regional differences in Ukraine, often making use of
misleading maps showing language or ethnicity by oblast, which implies
larger regional differences.

Russian politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky repeated his proposal to
partition Ukraine, saying that the seven westernmost oblasts should hold
secession referendums. He sent official letters to the governments of
Poland, Romania, and Hungary, suggesting that each hold a referendum
about absorbing the regions nearest them on historical grounds. The
letter was not taken seriously by the recipients, and was heavily
criticised in Poland, Ukraine, and Hungary. While Zhirinovsky's message
conflicted with the official position of the Kremlin, some considered
him a "mouthpiece for Putin", and possibly a reflection of increasing
nationalism in Russia.

### Commentary

Several scholars, including Alexander J. Motyl, Paul A. Goble, Timothy
D. Snyder, and Andreas Umland, have discussed the possibility of Russian
military intervention in Crimea specifically, due to its unique
geopolitical nature and demographics. Political scientist Uriel Abulof
suggested that instead of rejecting the referendum outright, the West
should have proposed a moratorium on a free plebiscite, arguing that the
clash over the principle of self-determination unearthed an emergent
“global crisis of legitimacy.”

Nina L. Khrushcheva, the great-granddaughter of former Soviet Premier
Nikita Khrushchev and a Russian Affairs professor at the The New School,
said that the aim of Crimea was not necessarily independence from
Ukraine, but rather continued dependence on Russia. However, this has
instead led Putin to justify continued backing for Yanukovych as well as
his own desires to re-take the peninsula. Nevertheless, she acknowledged
that Putin's long term goal may not be annexation of Crimea, since this
could cause ethnic Crimean Tatars, who had been forcibly displaced by
Stalin to Central Asia, to demand a return to Crimea and possibly cause
the Islamic insurgency to spread out of the Northern Caucasus.
Furthermore, she also states that if Russia sets a precedent of
recovering "lost territory", this could inspire countries such as China
or Georgia to demand back their own "stolen lands".

Former Ohio congressman and Democratic presidential nominee Dennis
Kucinich argued that the crisis is a result of "[..]America trying to
force the people of Ukraine into a deal with NATO against their interest
or into a deal with the European Union, which is against their economic
interest." He said that the United States has been involved "covertly
and behind the scenes with the CIA and two government foreign aid
groups, the National Endowment for Democracy and the United States
Agency for International Development, to stir up trouble in Ukraine",
which resulted in neo-Nazis taking control. This was disputed by
political commentator Bill O'Reilly who argued that Kucinich was giving
"Putin a pass to go in and invade" and that the Ukrainian people threw
out a puppet president. Former Republican congressman and three-time
presidential nominee Ron Paul mirrored this sentiment, calling US
sanctions against Russia an "act of war". Paul said, “The evidence is
pretty clear that the NGOs financed by our government have been
agitating with billions of dollars, trying to get that government
changed [..] Our hands are not clean.”; however, Ron Paul's remarks were
opposed to that of his son, senator Rand Paul, who wrote in an op-ed to
TIME magazine that, "“Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine is a gross
violation of that nation’s sovereignty and an affront to the
international community,” he wrote. “His continuing occupation of
Ukraine is completely unacceptable, and Russia’s president should be
isolated for his actions.”

Volodymyr Panchenko, of the Kiev-based think-tank International Center
for Policy Studies, said on February 28 that the aim of Russia is for
Crimea to be "more or less controlled by Russian troops," but that if or
when a referendum is held "more than 80 percent" of votes would be for
secession from Ukraine. The way events are unfolding in Crimea "is not a
good precedent for the other provinces."

Russian opposition leader, chess Grandmaster Garry Kasparov, former US
National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski, former US secretary of
state Hillary Clinton, Ukrainian MP Lesya Orobets (Batkivshchyna),
former foreign minister of the Czech Republic, Karel Schwarzenberg, as
well as the Foreign Affairs Minister of Canada John Baird all compared
Russia's actions to Nazi Germany's policy before the start of World War
II, after the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin.

Former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt called Russia's actions
"perfectly understandable", and considers sanctions being imposed by the
US and EU "foolish".

Ukraine's Chief Rabbi, Yaakov Bleich, described Putin's accusations of
anti-semitism from Ukrainians towards Jews as a pretense for invasion as
"what the Nazis did during the time of the Anschluss in Austria."

Commentaries and editorials published by China's state-run Xinhua News
Agency and *Global Times* supported Russia's position on the situation.

Related places
--------------

-   Building of the Supreme Council of Crimea, was seized on 27 February
    2014
-   Sevastopol, a city with special status in Crimea
-   Kerch Strait Bridge, planned bridge spanning the Strait of Kerch
-   Donetsk Oblast, which has held demonstrations calling for a
    secession referendum of its own
-   Donuzlav Lake, sinking of a tugboat *Shakhter* and an anti-submarine
    ship *Ochakov*, on March 5–6, 2014
-   Perevalne, Ukrainian garrison was surrounded by the Russian troops
-   Armyansk and Dzhankoy, checkpoints, established on 27 February 2014
-   Chonhar, a checkpoint, standoff since 8 March 2014
-   Port Krym, a strategic ferry connection with Russia's Port Kavkaz

