:   *For the period before 1989 see Agriculture in the Soviet Union and
    Agriculture in the Russian Empire.*

**Agriculture in Russia** survived a severe transition decline in the
early 1990s as it struggled to transform from a command economy to a
market-oriented system. Following the breakup of the Soviet Union in
1991, large collective and state farms – the backbone of Soviet
agriculture – had to contend with the sudden loss of state-guaranteed
marketing and supply channels and a changing legal environment that
created pressure for reorganization and restructuring. In less than ten
years, livestock inventories declined by half, pulling down demand for
feed grains, and the area planted to grains dropped by 25%.

The use of mineral fertilizer and other purchased inputs plummeted,
driving yields down. Most farms could no longer afford to purchase new
machinery and other capital investments. After nearly ten years of
decline, Russian agriculture has begun to show signs of modest
improvement. The transition to a more market-oriented system has
introduced an element of fiscal responsibility, which has resulted in
increased efficiency as farmers try to maintain productivity while
adjusting to resource constraints. The farming structure has changed,
and the relatively small family farms that have emerged and grown
stronger in the new market environment are now producing in aggregate
value more than the total output of large corporate farms that succeeded
the traditional collectives.

Ownership and farm structure
----------------------------

When the Kulaks were slain and sent to Siberia, until the 1980s, all
agricultural land in Russia was in state ownership, and the transition
to a market-oriented economy had to start with privatisation of land and
farm assets. Russia's agricultural privatisation programme can be traced
back to 1989–90, when Soviet legislation under Gorbachev allowed, first,
the creation of non-state business enterprises in the form of
cooperatives; and second, legalized private ownership of land by
individuals (the November 1990 Law of Land Reform). While household
plots cultivated by employees of collective farms and other rural
residents had played a key role in Russian agriculture since the 1930s,
legislation enabling independent private farms outside the collectivist
framework was passed only in November 1990.

This legislation provided three means for the formation of so-called
peasant farms (, *krestyanskie (fermerskie) khozyaistva*). One was that
a member of a collective farm could claim a share of land and equipment
from the collective and exit to form a small independent farm outside
the collectivist framework. Another involved a requirement that
collective farms turn over a portion of their "underutilized" land to
the local council as a reserve for distribution to outsiders who wanted
to become peasant farmers. The third allowed prospective peasant farmers
to lease land from the state (and later also from other landowners). In
addition to enabling legislation, the Russian government also provided
subsidies for private farmers.

The Law on Peasant Farms adopted in December 1990 was followed by laws
and decrees that defined the legal organizational forms of large
agricultural enterprises, the legal aspects of land ownership, and the
procedures for certifying and exercising ownership rights. Specifically,
agricultural land was denationalized, and its ownership (together with
the ownership of other farm assets) was legally transferred from the
state to the ownership of kolkhozes. But at the same time imposed a
ten-year moratorium on buying and selling privately owned land

The new legal environment created expectations among Western scholars
and Russian reform advocates that family farms would emerge in large
numbers and the large-scale collective farms would be restructured. But
as it turned out, few peasants were interested in establishing
individual farms, and management and operating practices inside large
agricultural enterprises remained largely unchanged despite formal
reorganization. The lack of enthusiasm for the creation of private farms
was attributed to inadequate rural infrastructure, which did not provide
processing and marketing services for small producers and also to the
fear that families striking out on their own might lose eligibility for
social services that were traditionally provided by the local corporate
farm instead of the municipality.

Starting in 1993, privatized kolkhoz and sovkhoz became a "corporate
farm". These farms were legally reorganized as common stock companies,
limited liability partnerships, or agricultural production cooperatives
and turned over, usually in their entirety, to the joint ownership of
agricultural workers and pensioners. These farms continued to operate
largely as they had done under the Soviet system. Today, the term
"corporate farm" is an all-inclusive phrase describing the various
organizational forms that arose in the process of privatisation without
involving distribution of physical parcels of land to individuals.
Subsequently, every employee received asset shares and land shares for
free. However, the land shares8 did not include real, individual
ownership of land plots, they were just paper certificates, that
substantiated rights to unspecified land plots on the territory of
former state or collective farms. To turn the land shares into
demarcated private land plots, peasants had to start a complex process
of registration. First Deputy Premier Viktor Zubkov revealed in February
2009 that of the 12 million land shareholders, only 400,000 owners have
been able to convert their shares to private property. More than 90
percent of privately owned land is owned as land shares, not as physical
plots of land.

In diametric opposition to corporate farms is the individual farm
sector, which consists of the traditional household plots and the newly
formed peasant farms.

The share of state-owned agricultural land decreased from 100% in 1990
to less than 40% in 2000. Privatisation of land ownership so far has not
resulted in transfer of direct control to individuals, and most land
privatised by the state is managed and cultivated by large-scale
corporate successors of former collective farms.

Russian agriculture today is characterized by three main types of farms.
Two of these farm types – corporate farms and household plots – existed
all through the Soviet period (the former are basically the successors
of the Soviet collective and state farms). The third type – peasant
farms – began to emerge only after 1990, during the post-Soviet
transition. The evolution of Russian agriculture since 1990 shows a
significant change of resources and production from the formerly
dominant corporate farms to the individual farming sector. During 2006,
household plots and peasant farms combined controlled about 20% of
agricultural land and 48% of cattle, up from 2% of agricultural land and
17% of cattle in 1990. The share of the individual sector in gross
agricultural output increased from 26% in 1990 to 59% in 2005. Producing
59% of agricultural output on 20% of land, individual farms achieve a
much greater productivity than corporate farms.

**Shares of agricultural land, cattle headcount, and gross agricultural
output\
for farms of different types (in percent of respective totals)**

  Indicator                 Farm type         1990   1995   2000   2005
  ------------------------- ----------------- ------ ------ ------ ------
  Agricultural land         Corporate farms   98     90     87     80
                            Household plots   2      5      6      10
                            Peasant farms     0      5      7      10
  Cattle                    Corporate farms   83     70     60     52
                            Household plots   17     29     38     44
                            Peasant farms     0      1      2      4
  Agricultural production   Corporate farms   74     50     43     41
                            Household plots   26     48     54     53
                            Peasant farms     0      2      3      6

During 2003, peasant farms accounted for 14.4% of Russia's total grain
production (up from 6.2% in 1997), 21.8% percent of sunflower seed (up
from 10.8% five years earlier), and 10.1% of sugar beets (3.5% in 1997).
Corporate farms produced the remainder of these crops, with hardly any
contribution from the small household plots. However, household plots,
with a maximum size of, produced 93% percent of the country's potatoes
and 80% of the vegetables, either for family consumption or for sale in
the local markets. They also produced 51% of the milk and 54% of the
meat in 2003, with the rest coming primarily from corporate farms (the
contribution of peasant farms to livestock production was negligible).

### Corporate farms

Corporate farming plays a strong role in Russian agriculture after
reforms such as the Russian Land Code which establish reliable title to
land. Some such as Black Earth Farming are financed externally.

### Household plots

As the household plots gained more land in the process of reform, their
share in Russia's agricultural production increased from 26% of
aggregate value in 1990 to 53% in 2005. According to a survey conducted
in three Russian villages, the increase in land holdings and farm
production tripled the nominal family income from 512 rubles per month
in 1997 to 1,525 rubles per month in 1999 (this includes both cash
income and the value of food that the family consumed from its household
plot). The change in family income outstripped inflation, increasing by
18% in real terms (the Consumer Price Index grew by 252% between 1997
and 1999). This real growth in family income reduced the percentage of
rural households living in poverty from 29% in 1997 to 17% in 1999.

Planting and harvest dates
--------------------------

The winter-crop planting season stretches over nearly three months. The
sowing campaign begins in August in the north and advances southward,
concluding in late October in the Southern district. Spring grain
planting in European Russia usually begins in April and progresses from
south to north. The "summer" crops—chiefly corn and sunflowers—are last
to be sown, and planting approaches completion by late May or early
June. The harvest of small grains (chiefly wheat and barley) moves from
south to north and begins in late June in extreme southern Russia.
Harvest operations are in full swing by early July and largely finished
by mid-to-late August. Corn and sunflower harvest begins in September
and continues through October. (View regional crop calendars.)

In the spring wheat region, planting typically begins in May. Oats are
sown first, followed by wheat, then barley. Planting is concluded by
June. Spring wheat advances through the reproductive stage during
mid-July, when temperatures climb to their highest levels and grains are
most vulnerable to heat stress. Grain harvest begins in late August and
continues through October. It is not unusual for a significant portion
of the Russian grain crop—millions of hectares in some years—to remain
unharvested, due chiefly to unfavorable weather during the harvest
campaign. In an average year, 10 percent of the area planted to spring
wheat is abandoned compared to 97 percent of the country's winter wheat
area.

### Harvest

Since the demise of the Soviet Union, grain harvest fell drastically.
Severe drought in 1998-1999 led to a harvest of 48 million tons and 60.2
million tons respectively, adding more to the economic crisis that hit
Russia in 1998, and thus forcing Russia to accept humanitarian aid. In
2006, Russia harvested 78.4 million tonnes of grain. In 2007, Russia
harvested 81.5 million tonnes. 2007 crops production exceeded the level
of 1990 by 10%, while livestock output was lagging behind the 1990 level
by about 30%.

Sectors
-------

### Crops

In 2009 the state owned ‟United Grain Company„ (UGC) was established by
the Russian government, which's official functions include increasing
the state's involvement in the domestic grain market, improving the
infrastructure of Russia's grain markets and grain marketing. Among
other functions, the UGC also acts as a government agent in the
government grain interventions. In May 2012, the UGC was partly
privatized as one of the largest Russian private investment holding
companies, Summa Group, purchased 49% of its shares.

In terms of area allocated, the most important grains are soft wheat and
barley. The main oilseed is unambiguously sunflower seed. During the
last decade land allocation for oilseeds doubled. At the same time
Russia has a huge potential of arable production, as 23% of all
agricultural land is bare fallow land. However this fallow land is
normally situated in the remote areas without proper road
infrastructure. Thus, the involvement of this fallow land into
agricultural production seems very difficult unless massive investments
into road infrastructure would be provided. Furthermore, much of the
fallow land became wild with shrubs and bushes, and hence more
investment would be required to return it to agricultural use.

### Dairy

In recent years, positive trends have been noted in the dairy sector in
the Russian Federation. The national average milk production rose 60
percent, from 2.2 tonnes in 1997 to 3.5 tonnes in 2007. Regions of
intensive production have emerged in the Northwest and Central federal
okrugs, which are near centres of industrial milk processing around
Moscow and St. Petersburg. These regions are characterized not only by
high yields per cow but also by increasing production volumes. There has
also been significant progress in smoothing out the seasonality of milk
production, which has been completely overcome in some regions, in
particular in the Leningrad Oblast, Moscow Oblast, Altai Krai, Krasnodar
Krai and in the Republic of Tatarstan, and Bashkortostan. Both private
and public investments in the sector have increased, enabling the
creation of large dairy farms with modern technology. Against a
background of increasing consumer demand, the milk processing industry
has developed rapidly.

The high seasonality of milk production has been a problem for dairy
farms since Soviet times. Shortages of milk in autumn and winter
followed by surpluses of milk in the summer caused fluctuations in
market prices.

New federal technical regulation for milk and dairy products took effect
at the end of 2008. These regulations set requirements for milk and
dairy products to ensure that production, storage, transportation,
points of sale and utilization of dairy products are safe. They also
introduced new technology for the dairy sector, as well as packaging and
labelling standards for milk and dairy products.

Farm credit
-----------

While agricultural policy in Russia had been poorly structured and
largely unsuccessful, some basic trends have helped to create forces for
change. The first is that state tax revenues have been falling, and
hence the spending capacity for agricultural policy has been falling.
Total federal transfers to agriculture fell from 10% to 4% of GDP from
1992 to 1993, and budgeted transfers for 1994 are about 2% of GDP.

There has been improvement in the agricultural credit situation in
Russia over the past five years – for some farms, at least – due largely
to subsidies from the federal government. The national project for
agriculture has given impetus to the growth of small farms. During 2006,
36 billion rubles in credit were given to more than 100,000 recipients
(as compared to 3.4 billion rubles in credit to 2,500 borrowers in
2005). Traditional farms and personal plots play an important role in
the sector, providing more than 87 percent of all production.

The State offers in-kind credits, whereby seed, fertilizer, and other
inputs are provided in exchange for grain harvested at the end of the
season, though the use of in-kind credit is reportedly decreasing. The
government also provides subsidies for the purchase of plant-protection
chemicals and fertilizers, and subsidizes two-thirds of the interest
rate on loans from commercial banks, which provide the majority of farm
credit. Banks remain cautious and insist on certain farm management
practices and minimum levels of input use before granting loans (a
policy which, according to some observers, has had a significant
positive effect on overall efficiency in the agricultural sector), but
banks’ confidence is boosted by increasingly reliable guarantees from
regional administrations who see stability of food production as a high
priority. Banks recognize the inherent risk in agricultural financing
but also see agriculture as less risky than other industries and are
generally willing to lend money to solvent, well-managed farms.

Over fifty percent of Russia’s farms, however, are already saddled with
considerable debt, due in part to the disparity between grain prices and
production costs, and few farms are able to offer sufficient collateral
to secure a loan. As a result, many farms are forced to rely on outside
investors to guarantee loans. These investors, frequently referred to as
holding companies, typically are large, cash-rich, traditionally
non-agricultural companies that became involved in agriculture over the
past five years. Some viewed crop production as a potentially highly
profitable venture, and others were working to guarantee raw materials
for vertically integrated food-processing operations.

Holding companies possess assets that satisfy banks’ demand for
collateral, and a farm that receives a commercial loan with the help of
a holding company is still eligible for the federal interest subsidy.
Many holding companies, particularly those who were attracted to
agriculture by the high grain prices during 2000, have lost interest in
crop production following two years of low prices and are bailing out.
Investments in crop production don’t pay off quickly, in contrast to
investments in trade. Although some holding companies remain comfortable
with the variable profitability of agriculture and will continue to work
with farms, several prominent commodity analysts feel that the overall
involvement of big companies in agriculture is declining.

This means that current prospects for significant, long-term investment
in agriculture – particularly the purchase of agricultural machinery and
grain-storage facilities – are somewhat dim. Land reform has been
evolving in Russia since the basic right to own farmland was established
in 1993, but "landowners" are still unable to use land as collateral in
securing a loan. The situation, however, is not one that can be resolved
quickly or easily through legislation alone.

There is no mechanism currently in place to enable banks to evaluate the
value of land based on its productivity before issuing loans, and banks
likely would be reluctant to use land as collateral regardless of
legislation. Furthermore, there are restrictions against
non-agricultural use of land that is currently used for agriculture: if
land is used for other purposes, the owner loses the title to the land.
This imposes a limit on the land’s "re-sellability," and, in turn, its
value. The use of land as collateral appears to be a remote prospect.

Investments
-----------

Investments in fixed capital within the agricultural sector were 10.1
billion USD in 2010, which is 3.3% of total investments in the national
economy of Russia. Most investments occurred in corporate farming, where
about 43.2% of the investments were allocated to production buildings
and 36.4% in machinery and technological equipments. Financing of
investments was shared by own financial means (49%) and by external
means (51%).

### State investment program

In December 2006, the State Duma passed a law requiring a state program
for investment in agriculture to be passed every five years. This is the
first of those programs. Between 2003 and 2007, agriculture received
37.1 billion rubles' support per year.

Role of agriculture in economy
------------------------------

As non-agricultural sectors grew more rapidly after the collapse of the
Soviet Union, the share of agriculture in total GDP in Russia decreased
from 14.3% in 1991 to 4% in 2011. Furthermore, the agricultural sector
accounted for 9% of total employment in 2010
