**Alcoholism in Russia** is reflected in its effects on the country's
social fabric and in its political, economic and public health
ramifications. Alcoholism has been a problem throughout the country's
history because drinking is a pervasive, socially acceptable behaviour
in Russian society. It has also been a major source of government
revenue for centuries. It has repeatedly been targeted as a major
national problem, with mixed results.

According to the WHO 2011 report, annual per capita alcohol consumption
in Russia is about 15.76 litres, or the equivalent of about sixty 700
millilitre bottles of vodka; the fourth highest volume in Europe.

History
-------

Drinking as a part of Russian culture has deep roots, dating back to at
least the tenth century AD. Legend holds that the tenth-century Russian
prince Vladimir the Great rejected Islam as a state religion for the
country because of its prohibition of alcohol. Historically, it has been
tolerated or even encouraged as a source of revenue.

In the 1540s, Ivan IV began setting up kabaks (*кабак*) or taverns in
his major cities to help fill his coffers; a third of Russian men were
in debt to the kabaks by 1648. By 1860, vodka, the national drink, was
the source of 40% of the government's revenue. At the beginning of World
War I, prohibition was introduced in the Russian Empire, limiting the
sale of hard liquor to restaurants.

### 20th century

After the Bolshevik Party came to power, they made repeated attempts to
reduce consumption in the Soviet Union. However, by 1925, vodka had
reappeared in state-run stores. Joseph Stalin reestablished a state
monopoly to generate revenue.

Soviet leaders Nikita Khrushchev, Leonid Brezhnev (himself a drinker),
Yuri Andropov, and Konstantin Chernenko all tried to stem alcoholism.
Mikhail Gorbachev increased controls on alcohol in 1985; he attempted to
impose a partial prohibition, which involved a massive anti-alcohol
campaign, severe penalties against public drunkenness and alcohol
consumption, and restrictions on sales of liquor. The campaign was
temporarily successful in reducing per capita alcohol consumption and
improving quality-of-life measures such as life expectancies and crime
rates, but it was deeply unpopular among the population and it
ultimately failed. In 2010, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev nearly
doubled the minimum price of a bottle of vodka in an effort to combat
the problem.

Impact
------

### Demographic

A study by Russian, British and French researchers published in *The
Lancet* scrutinized deaths between 1990 and 2001 of residents of three
Siberian industrial towns with typical mortality rates and determined
that 52% of deaths of people between the ages of 15 and 54 were the
result of alcohol abuse. Lead researcher Professor David Zaridze
estimated that the increase in alcohol consumption since 1987 has caused
an additional three million deaths nationwide.

In 2007, Gennadi Onishenko, the country's chief public health official,
voiced his concern over the nearly threefold rise in alcohol consumption
over the past 16 years; one in eight deaths was attributed to
alcohol-related diseases, playing a major role in Russia's population
decline. Men are particularly hard hit; according to a U.N. National
Human Development Report, Russian males born in 2006 had a life
expectancy of just over 60 years, 17 fewer than western Europeans, while
Russian females could expect to live thirteen years longer than their
male counterparts.

In June 2009, the Public Chamber of Russia reported over 500,000
alcohol-related deaths annually, noting that Russians consume about of
spirits a year, more than double the World Health Organization experts
consider dangerous.

### Economic

In 1985, at the time of Gorbachev's campaign to reduce drinking, it was
estimated that alcoholism resulted in \$8 billion in lost production.

### Social

In the early 1980s, an estimated "two-thirds of murders and violent
crimes were committed by intoxicated persons; and drunk drivers were
responsible for 14,000 traffic deaths and 60,000 serious traffic
injuries". In 1995, about three quarters of those arrested for homicide
were under the influence of alcohol, and 29% of respondents reported
that children beaten within families were the victims of drunks and
alcoholics.

A 1997 report published in the *Journal of Family Violence*, found that
among male perpetrators of spousal homicide, 60–75% of offenders had
been drinking prior to the incident.

#### Suicide

In 2008, suicide claimed 38,406 lives in Russia. With a rate of 27.1
suicides per 100,000 people, Russia has one of the highest suicide rates
in the world, although it has been steadily decreasing since it peaked
at around 40 per 100,000 in the mid-late 90s, including a 30% drop from
2001 to 2006.

Heavy alcohol use is a significant factor in the suicide rate, with an
estimated half of all suicides a result of alcohol abuse. This is
evident by the fact that Russia's suicide rate since the mid-90s has
declined alongside per capita alcohol consumption, despite the economic
crises since then; alcohol consumption is more of a factor than economic
conditions.

Treatment
---------

From the 1930s and 1940s until the mid-1980s, the main treatment for
alcoholism in Russia was conditioned response therapy. This treatment
has since fallen out of favour, and the modern mainstream treatment is
pharmacotherapy, which involves detailed analyses of each patient,
medicinal treatment, psychotherapy, sociotherapy, and other support.
Although Alcoholics Anonymous exists in Russia, it lacks funding and
support from the government and so is generally dismissed by the Russian
population.

One alternative therapy for alcoholism that has been used in Russia is
the practice of "coding," in which therapists pretend to insert a "code"
into patients' brains with the ostensible effect that drinking even
small amounts of alcohol will be extremely harmful or even lethal.
Despite not being recommended in Russian clinical guidelines it has
enjoyed considerable popularity, although in recent years its use has
lessened due to the spread of information about its ineffectiveness.
