The **Christianization of Kievan Rus**' took place in several stages. In
early 867, Patriarch Photius of Constantinople announced to other
Orthodox patriarchs that the Rus', baptised by his bishop, took to
Christianity with particular enthusiasm. Photius's attempts at
Christianizing the country seem to have entailed no lasting
consequences, since the Primary Chronicle and other Slavonic sources
describe the tenth-century Rus' as firmly entrenched in paganism. The
definitive Christianisation of Kiev dates from the late 980s (the year
is disputed), when Vladimir the Great was baptized at Chersonesos,
proceeding to baptize his family and people in Kiev. The place of
Vladimir's baptism is marked by St. Vladimir's Cathedral.

Prehistory
----------

According to the legends, Christianity was first brought to the
territory of modern Belarus, Russia and Ukraine by Saint Andrew, the
first Apostle of Jesus Christ. He traveled over the Black Sea to the
Greek colony of Chersonesus Taurica in Crimea, where he converted
several thousand men to new faith. Allegedly Saint Andrew traveled also
north along the Dnieper River, where Kiev would be founded around the
5th century, and as far north as the future location of Veliky Novgorod.
The legendary account of the Russian Primary Chronicle tells that Saint
Andrew was amused by the Slavic customs of washing in hot steam bath,
banya, on his way.

North Pontic Greek colonies, both in Crimea and on the modern Ukrainian
shores of the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea, remained the main centers
of Christianity in Eastern Europe for almost a thousand years. Notable
Christian locations there include the Inkerman Cave Monastery, a
medieval Byzantine monastery where the relics of St. Clement, the fourth
Bishop of Rome, were supposedly kept before their removal to San
Clemente by Saints Cyril and Methodius.

Saints Cyril and Methodius were the missionaries of Christianity among
the Slavic peoples of Bulgaria, Great Moravia and Pannonia. Through
their work they influenced the cultural development of all Slavs, for
which they received the title *"Apostles to the Slavs"*. They are
credited with devising the Glagolitic alphabet, the first alphabet used
to transcribe Old Church Slavonic, as well as Cyrillic script used now
in many Slavic countries, including Russia. After their deaths, their
pupils continued their missionary work among other Slavs. Both brothers
are venerated in the Orthodox Church as saints with the title of
*"equal-to-apostles"*.

Ninth century
-------------

:   

The most authoritative source for the early Christianization of Rus' is
an encyclical letter of Patriarch Photius, datable to early 867.
Referencing the Siege of Constantinople of 860, Photius informs the
Oriental patriarchs and bishops that, after the Bulgarians turned to
Christ in 863, the Rus' followed suit. As was the case with the
Bulgarians, the Patriarch found it prudent to send to the barbarians a
bishop from Constantinople.

With some modifications, the story is repeated by Constantine VII in *De
Administrando Imperio*, followed by several generations of Byzantine
historians, including John Skylitzes and John Zonaras. That the imperial
court and patriarchate regarded the 10th-century Rus' as Christians is
evident from the fact that the bishopric of Rus' was enumerated in the
lists of Orthodox sees, compiled during the reigns of Leo the Wise and
Constantine VII. There is also an argumentum ex silentio: no Greek
source recorded the second baptism of the Rus in the 990s.

Tenth century
-------------

Whatever the scope of Photius's efforts to Christianize the Rus', their
effect was not lasting. Although they fail to mention the mission of
Photius, the authors of the Primary Chronicle were aware that a sizable
portion of the Kievan population was Christian by 944. In the
Russo-Byzantine Treaty, preserved in the text of the chronicle, the
Christian part of the Rus' swear according to their faith, while the
ruling prince and other non-Christians invoke Perun and Veles after the
pagan custom. The Kievan collegiate church of St. Elijah (whose cult in
the Slavic countries was closely modeled on that of Perun) is mentioned
in the text of the chronicle, leaving modern scholars to ponder how many
churches existed in Kiev at the time.

Either in 945 or 957, the ruling regent, Olga of Kiev, visited
Constantinople with a certain priest, Gregory. Her reception at the
imperial court is described in *De Ceremoniis*. According to legends,
Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII fell in love with Olga; however, she
found a way to refuse him by tricking him to become her godfather. When
she was baptized, she said it was inappropriate for a godfather to marry
his goddaughter.

Although it is usually presumed that Olga was baptized in Constantinople
rather than Kiev, there is no explicit mention of the sacrament, so
neither version is excluded. Olga is also known to have requested a
bishop and priests from Rome. Her son, Sviatoslav (r. 963-972),
continued to worship Perun and other gods of the Slavic pantheon. He
remained a stubborn pagan all of his life; according to the Primary
Chronicle, he believed that his warriors would lose respect for him and
mock him if he became a Christian.

Svyatoslav's successor, Yaropolk I (r. 972-980), seems to have had a
more conciliatory attitude towards Christianity. Late medieval sources
even claim that Yaropolk exchanged ambassadors with the Pope. The
*Chronicon* of Ad√©mar de Chabannes and the life of St. Romuald (by
Pietro Damiani) actually document the mission of St. Bruno of Querfurt
to the land of Rus', where he succeeded in converting to Christianity a
local king (one of three brothers who ruled the land). Alexander
Nazarenko suggests that Yaropolk went through some preliminary rites of
baptism, but was murdered at the behest of his pagan half-brother
Vladimir (whose own rights to the throne were questionable) before his
conversion was formalized. Following this theory, any information on
Yaropolk's baptism according to the Latin rite would be suppressed by
the later Orthodox chroniclers, zealous to keep Vladimir's image of the
Rus Apostle untarnished for succeeding generations.

Vladimir's baptism of Kiev
--------------------------

### Background

During the first decade of Vladimir's reign, pagan reaction set in.
Perun was chosen as the supreme deity of the Slavic pantheon and his
idol was placed on the hill by the royal palace. This revival of
paganism was contemporaneous with similar attempts undertaken by Jarl
Haakon in Norway and (possibly) Svein Forkbeard in Denmark. Although
Vladimir seems to have gone further than both Scandinavian konungs (even
human sacrifices were reported in Kiev), his religious reform failed. By
the late 980s he had found it necessary to adopt monotheism from abroad.

The Primary Chronicle reports that, in the year 986, Vladimir met with
representatives from several religions. The result is amusingly
described in the following apocryphal anecdote. Upon the meeting with
Muslim Bulgarians of the Volga, Vladimir found their religion unsuitable
due to its requirement to circumcise and taboos against alcoholic
beverages and pork; supposedly, Vladimir said on that occasion:
"Drinking is the joy of the Rus', we can't go without it." He also
consulted with Jewish envoys (who may or may not have been Khazars),
questioned them about their religion but ultimately rejected it, saying
that their loss of Jerusalem was evidence of their having been abandoned
by God.

In the year 987, as the result of a consultation with his boyars,
Vladimir sent envoys to study the religions of the various neighboring
nations whose representatives had been urging him to embrace their
respective faiths. Of the Muslim Bulgarians of the Volga the envoys
reported there is no joy among them; only sorrow and a great stench. In
the gloomy churches of the Germans his emissaries saw no beauty; but at
Hagia Sophia, where the full festival ritual of the Byzantine Church was
set in motion to impress them, they found their ideal: *"We no longer
knew whether we were in heaven or on earth,"* they reported, *"nor such
beauty, and we know not how to tell of it."*

### Baptism of Vladimir

Foreign sources, very few in number, present the following story of
Vladimir's conversion. Yahya of Antioch and his followers
(al-Rudhrawari, al-Makin, Al-Dimashqi, and ibn al-Athir) give
essentially the same account. In 987, the generals Bardas Sclerus and
Bardas Phocas revolted against the Byzantine emperor Basil II. Both
rebels briefly joined forces and advanced on Constantinople. On
September 14, 987, Bardas Phocas proclaimed himself emperor. Anxious to
avoid the siege of his capital, Basil II turned to the Rus' for
assistance, even though they were considered enemies at that time.
Vladimir agreed, in exchange for a marital tie; he also agreed to accept
Orthodox Christianity as his religion and bring his people to the new
faith. When the wedding arrangements were settled, Vladimir dispatched
6,000 troops to the Byzantine Empire and they helped to put down the
revolt.

In the Primary Chronicle, the account of Vladimir's baptism is preceded
by the so-called Korsun' Legend. According to this apocryphal story, in
988 Vladimir captured the Greek town of Korsun' (Chersonesos) in Crimea,
highly important commercially and politically. This campaign may have
been dictated by his wish to secure the benefits promised to him by
Basil II, when he had asked for the Rus' assistance against Phocas. In
recompense for the evacuation of Chersonesos, Vladimir was promised the
hand of the emperor's sister, Anna Porphyrogenita. Prior to the wedding,
Vladimir was baptized (either in Chersonesos or in Kiev), taking the
Christian name of Basil out of compliment to his imperial
brother-in-law. The sacrament was followed by his marriage with the
Greek princess.

### Baptism of Kiev

Returning to Kiev in triumph, Vladimir violently exhorted the residents
of his capital to the Dnieper river for baptism. This mass baptism
became the iconic inaugural event in the Christianization of the state
of Kievan Rus'.

At first Vladimir baptised his 12 sons and many boyars. He destroyed the
wooden statues of Slavic pagan gods (which he had himself raised just
eight years earlier). They were either burnt or hacked into pieces, and
the statue of Perun ‚Äî the supreme god ‚Äî was thrown into the Dnieper.

Then Vladimir sent a message to all residents of Kiev, "rich, and poor,
and beggars, and slaves", to come to the river on the following day,
lest they risk becoming the "prince's enemies". Large number of people
came; some even brought infants with them. They were sent into the water
while Orthodox priests, who came from Chersonesos for the occasion,
prayed.

To commemorate the event, Vladimir built the first stone church of
Kievan Rus', called the Church of the Tithes, where his body and the
body of his new wife were to repose. Another church was built on top of
the hill where pagan statues stood before.

Aftermath
---------

The baptism of Kiev was followed by similar ceremonies in other urban
centres of the country. The Ioakim Chronicle says that Vladimir's uncle,
Dobrynya, forced the Novgorodians into Christianity "by fire", while the
local mayor, Putyata, persuaded his compatriots to accept Christian
faith "by the sword". At that same time, Bishop Ioakim Korsunianin built
the first, wooden, Cathedral of Holy Wisdom "with 13 tops" on the site
of a pagan cemetery.

Paganism persisted in the country for a long time, surfacing during the
Upper Volga Uprising and other occasional pagan protests. The
northeastern part of the country, centred on Rostov, was particularly
hostile to the new religion. Novgorod itself faced a pagan uprising as
late as 1071, in which Bishop Fedor faced a real threat to his person;
Prince Gleb Sviatoslaich broke up the crowd by chopping a sorcerer in
half with an axe.

Image:Ostromirovo.jpg|thumb|240px|The Ostromir Gospels, written in the
Church Slavonic, one of the first dated East Slavic books. The
Christianisation of Kievan Rus' firmly allied it with the Byzantine
Empire. The Greek learning and book culture was adopted in Kiev and
other centres of the country. Churches started to be built on the
Byzantine model. During the reign of Vladimir's son Yaroslav I,
Metropolitan Ilarion authored the first known work of East Slavic
literature, an elaborate oration in which he favourably compared Rus to
other lands known as the "Sermon on Law and Grace". The Ostromir
Gospels, produced in Novgorod during the same period, was the first
dated East Slavic book fully preserved. But the only surviving work of
lay literature, *The Tale of Igor's Campaign*, indicates that a degree
of pagan worldview remained under Christian Kievan Rus'.

In 1988, the faithful of the Eastern Orthodox churches which have roots
in the baptism of Kiev celebrated a millennium of Eastern Slavic
Christianity. The great celebrations in Moscow changed the character of
relationship between the Soviet state and the church. For the first time
since 1917, numerous churches and monasteries were returned to the
Russian Orthodox Church. In Ukrainian communities around the world,
members of various Ukrainian churches also celebrated the Millennium of
Christianity in Ukraine.

In 2008 the National Bank of Ukraine issued into circulation
commemorative coins "Christianization of Kievan Rus" within "Rebirth of
the Christian Spirituality in Ukraine" series.

See also
--------

-   Christianization of the Rus' Khaganate
-   St. Vladimir's Cathedral
-   Baptism of Poland
-   Christianity in the 10th century

References
----------

Category:Eastern Orthodoxy Category:Kievan Rus' Category:History of
Christianity by geography or ethnicity|Rus' Category:Christian
interfaith and secular relations Category:10th-century Christianity
Category:History of Eastern Orthodoxy Category:Conversion to
Christianity Category:History of Ukraine Category:History of
Christianity in Ukraine Category:980s in Europe Category:10th century in
Russia Category:860s in Europe Category:867 in the Byzantine Empire
Category:867 in Europe Category:9th century in Russia
