The **cinema of Russia** began in the Russian Empire, widely developed
in the Soviet Union and in the years following its dissolution, the
Russian film industry would remain internationally recognized. In the
21st century, Russian cinema has become popular internationally with
hits such as *House of Fools*, *Night Watch*, and the popular *Brother*.
Moscow International Film Festival is held in Moscow from 1935 and Nika
Award is the main annual national film award in Russia.

Cinema of the Russian Empire
----------------------------

Image:Moszhuserge.jpg|thumb|Ivan Mozzhukhin as the title character in
Yakov Protazanov's 1917 film, *Father Sergius*. It was the last film of
the Russian Empire era.

The first films seen in the Russian Empire were brought in by the
Auguste and Louis Lumière|Lumière brothers, who exhibited films in
Moscow and St. Petersburg in May 1896. That same month, Lumière
cameraman Camille Cerf made the first film in Russia, recording the
coronation of Nicholas II at the Kremlin.

Aleksandr Drankov produced the first Russian narrative film *Stenka
Razin*, based on events told in a popular folk song and directed by
Vladimir Romashkov. Ladislas Starevich made the first Russian animated
film (and the first stop motion puppet film with a story) in 1910 -
*Lucanus Cervus*. Among the notable Russian filmmakers of the era were
Aleksandr Khanzhonkov and Ivan Mozzhukhin, who made *Defence of
Sevastopol* in 1912. Yakov Protazanov made *Departure of a Grand Old
Man*, a biographical film about Lev Tolstoy.

During World War I, imports dropped drastically, and Russian filmmakers
turned out anti-German, nationalistic films. In 1916, 499 films were
made in Russia, more than three times the number of just three years
earlier.

The Russian Revolution brought more change, with a number of films with
anti-Tsarist themes. The last significant film of the era, made in 1917,
*Father Sergius* would become the first new film release of the Soviet
era.

Cinema of the Soviet Union
--------------------------

Although Russian was the dominant language in films during the Soviet
era, the cinema of the Soviet Union encompassed films of the Armenian
SSR, Georgian SSR, Ukrainian SSR, and, to a lesser degree, Lithuanian
SSR, Byelorussian SSR and Moldavian SSR. For much of the Soviet Union's
history, with notable exceptions in the 1920s and the late 1980s, film
content was heavily circumscribed and subject to censorship and
bureaucratic state control. Despite this, Soviet films achieved
significant critical success from the 1950s onwards partly as a result,
similar to the cinema of other Eastern Bloc countries, for reflecting
the tension between independent creativity and state-directed outcomes.

As with much Soviet art during the 1920s, films addressed major social
and political events of the time. Probably the single most important
film of this period was Sergei Eisenstein's *The Battleship Potemkin*,
not only because of its depiction of events leading up to the 1905
Revolution, but also because of innovative cinematic techniques, such as
the use of jump-cuts to achieve political ends. Other notable films of
the period include Vsevolod Pudovkin's *Mother* (1926) and Dziga
Vertov's *Man with a Movie Camera* (1929).

However, with the consolidation of Stalinist power in the Soviet Union,
and the emergence of Socialist realism as state policy, which carried
over from painting and sculpture into filmmaking, Soviet film became
subject to almost total state control.

One of the most popular films released in 1930s was *Circus*.

Notable films from 1940s include *Aleksandr Nevsky* and *Ivan the
Terrible*.

Immediately after the end of the Second World War, the Soviet color
films such as *The Stone Flower* (1947), *Ballad of Siberia*
(:ru:Сказание о земле Сибирской|Сказание о земле Сибирской, 1947), and
*The Kuban Cossacks* (:ru:Кубанские казаки (фильм)|Кубанские казаки,
1949) were released.

In the late 1950s and early 1960s Soviet film-makers were given a less
constricted environment, and while censorship remained, films emerged
which began to be recognised outside the Soviet bloc such as *Ballad of
a Soldier* which won the 1961 BAFTA Award for Best Film and *The Cranes
Are Flying*. *Height* (:ru:Высота (фильм)|Высота, 1957) is considered to
be one of the best films of the 1950s (it also became the foundation of
the Bard movement).

The 1970s saw the emergence of a range of films which won international
attention, including Andrei Tarkovsky's *Solaris*; *White Sun of the
Desert* (1970), and "Ostern" – the Soviet Union's own take on the
Western genre.

With the onset of Perestroika and Glasnost in the mid-1980s, Soviet
films emerged which began to address formerly censored topics, such as
drug addiction, *The Needle*, and sexuality and alienation in Soviet
society, *Little Vera*.

New Russian cinema
------------------

### 1990s

Russian cinema of the 90s acquired new features and themes.

The drama *Burnt by the Sun* (1994) by Nikita Mikhalkov is a story of
small countryside community when new times of Stalinism are taking pace
to disrupt their idylic reclusion and distort their characters and
fates. The film received an Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film.

The Peculiarities of the National Hunt (1995) by Aleksandr Rogozhkin was
one of the first most notable Russian national comedy. It was followed
by Peculiarities of the National Fishing (1998) and Peculiarities of the
National Hunt in the Winter (2001).

In the context of the Russian WWII history Pavel Chukhrai filmed *The
Thief* (1997), a movie about a mother with son seeking a manly support
and finding a criminal in military clothes. The film was awarded with 6
national prizes Nika, got a special prize in Venice and became the Oscar
nominee.

Made by Valery Todorovsky *The Country of the Deaf* (1998) comedy based
on the plot of Renata Litvinova is parodying Russia of the 90s as a
journey of two female friends caught in the fight of two clans - the
deaf and the hearing.

The profound Dmitri Meskhiyev's melodrama *Woman's property* (:ru:
Женская собственность|Женская собственность, 1999) reflected subtle
relationship between young student and older actress that grew into
love-affair. The awaited death of one of the protagonists leaves the
other facing the bitter loneliness.

East/West co-production film tells history of early years of Stalinism
as a story of emigre family living in the USSR.

### 2000s

Image:Night Watch poster.jpg|thumb|right|150px|Night Watch poster Andrey
Zvyagintsev's *The Return*, a Golden Lion award recipient, shows two
brothers' test of life when their father suddenly returns that reaches a
deep almost-mystic pitch.

The *Russian Ark*, 2003 by Alexander Sokurov, was filmed in a single
96-minute shot in the Russian Hermitage Museum is a dream-like narration
that tells about Classic Russian culture sailing in the Ark.

The *Night Watch* was one of the first blockbusters made after the
collapse of the Soviet film industry, it was a 2004 supernatural
thriller directed by Timur Bekmambetov. It is the first part of a
trilogy, followed by Day Watch (2006) and ending supposedly with
Twilight Watch.

The serialised novels by Boris Akunin set in pre-Revolutionary Russia
evolve around fictional Erast Fandorin adventures in three popular
movies: *The Azazel*, *The Turkish Gambit* and *The State Counsellor*.

Life of the Orthodox Monastery and their Christian miracles are
described in the film The Island by Pavel Lungin. The film was highly
acclaimed by critics and was much-awarded by spectators and prizes.

The *Irony of Fate 2* filmed in 2007 by Timur Bekmambetov, was the
highest-grossing film within Russia up until the release of Avatar
there. It is a sequel to the first Irony of Fate filmed in 1975.

Colorful musical *Stilyagi*, *Hipsters* about young generation lifestyle
in the Soviet Union was a big success for its profound and vibrant
portrait of the era of the 1950s. Filmed by Valery Todorovsky in 2008.

### 2010s

*How I Ended This Summer* by Alexei Popogrebski a film shot in remote
Chukotka won Berlin's Film Festival Golden Bear in 2010 and thrills upon
the face-off generation gap.

The same year *Silent Souls*, an arthouse film wins Golden Osella for
the best cinematography. Beautifully filmed it is a melancholic poem of
love and death.

One of the many successful movies that were made in co-starring with
Western actors and actresses is a comedy *Lucky Trouble*, 2011 which
features Milla Jovovich.

One of the most successful Russia's director to enter Hollywood is Timur
Bekmambetov producing and screening blockbusters.

List of highest-grossing films
------------------------------

According to Kinopoisk.ru, highest grossing Russian films, as of 2014,
are the following:

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Rank   Title                                             scope="col" width=8% | Gross   Year   Genre                    scope="col" width=20%|Details                                                         scope="col" width=15%|Director
  ------ ------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------ ------ ------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------
  1      Сталинград\                                       \$66 692 826                   2013   War                      A World War II film about Battle of Stalingrad                                        Fyodor Bondarchuk
         *Stalingrad*                                                                                                                                                                                           

  2      Ирония судьбы. Продолжение\                       \$55 635 037                   2007   Romantic comedy          A Christmas film, the sequel to a 1976 film of the same name                          Timur Bekmambetov
         *The Irony of Fate 2|Irony of Fate: The Sequel*                                                                                                                                                        

  3      Дневной дозор\                                    \$38 862 717                   2006   Fantasy                  Based on urban fantasy book series *Dozory* by Sergey Lukyanenko                      Timur Bekmambetov
         *Day Watch*                                                                                                                                                                                            

  4      Адмиралъ\                                         \$38 135 878                   2008   Biography, History       About Russian Civil War monarchist leader, Admiral Alexander Kolchak                  Janik Fayziyev
         *Admiral*                                                                                                                                                                                              

  5      Ночной дозор\                                     \$33 951 015                   2004   Fantasy                  Based on urban fantasy book series *Dozory* by Sergey Lukyanenko                      Timur Bekmambetov
         *Night Watch*                                                                                                                                                                                          

  6      Три богатыря на дальних берегах\                  \$31 505 876                   2012   Animation, Fairy tale    An interpretation of medieval Russian folklore                                        Kostantin Feoktistov\
         *Three Knights at the Distant Shores*                                                                                                                                                                  (Melnitsa Animation)

  7      Легенда №17\                                      \$29 523 237                   2013   Biography, Sport drama   About Soviet hockeyist Valery Kharlamov                                               Nikolai Lebedev
         *Legend\#17*                                                                                                                                                                                           

  8      Обитаемый остров\                                 \$27 908 763                   2009   Science fiction          Based on a dystopian book by Strugatsky brothers                                      Fyodor Bondarchuk
         *The Inhabited Island*                                                                                                                                                                                 

  9      Высоцкий. Спасибо, что живой\                     \$27 544 905                   2011   Biography, Drama         About Soviet singer Vladimir Vysotsky                                                 Pyotr Buslov
         *Vysotsky. Thank You For Being Alive*                                                                                                                                                                  

  10     Ёлки 2\                                           \$26 231 525                   2011   Comedy                   A Christmas film                                                                      Dmitry Kiselyov,\
         *Christmas Trees 2*                                                                                                                                                                                    Alexander Kott and others

  11     9 рота\                                           \$25 555 809                   2005   War                      About Soviet war in Afghanistan                                                       Fyodor Bondarchuk
         *The 9th Company*                                                                                                                                                                                      

  12     Иван Царевич и серый волк\                        \$24 830 497                   2011   Animation, Fairy tale    An interpretation of medieval Russian folklore                                        Vladimir Toropchin\
         *Prince Ivan and the Big Grey Wolf*                                                                                                                                                                    (Melnitsa Animation)

  13     Ёлки\                                             \$22 772 019                   2010   Comedy                   A Christmas film                                                                      Timur Bekmambetov,\
         *Christmas Trees*                                                                                                                                                                                      Dmitry Kiselyov and others

  14     Наша Russia: Яйца судьбы\                         \$22 213 287                   2010   Comedy                   Based on a TV show of the same name                                                   Gleb Orlov
         *Our Russia and the Eggs of Destiny*                                                                                                                                                                   

  15     Чёрная молния\                                    \$21 500 000                   2009   Superhero                                                                                                      Timur Bekmambetov
         *Black Lightning*                                                                                                                                                                                      

  16     Волкодав\                                         \$21 015 154                   2006   Fantasy                  Based on a medieval high fantasy book by Maria Semenova                               Nikolai Lebedev
         *Wolfhound*                                                                                                                                                                                            

  17     Три богатыря и Шамаханская царица\                \$19 010 585                   2010   Animation, Fairy tale    An interpretation of medieval Russian folklore                                        Sergey Glezin\
         *Three Knights and the Queen of Shаmakha*                                                                                                                                                              (Melnitsa Animation)

  18     Турецкий гамбит\                                  \$18 500 000                   2005   History, Spy             Based on a book by Boris Akunin, about espionage at 19th-century Russo-Turkish war    Janik Fayziyev
         *The Turkish Gambit*                                                                                                                                                                                   

  19     О чём ещё говорят мужчины\                        \$17 808 683                   2011   Comedy                   Starring comic group Quartet I, a sequel to *What Men Talk About*                     Dmitry Dyachenko
         *What Else Man Talk About*                                                                                                                                                                             

  20     Тарас Бульба\                                     \$17 040 803                   2009   History, Epic            Based on a book by Nikolai Gogol, about Khmelnytsky Uprising in 17t-century Ukraine   Vladimir Bortko
         *Taras Bulba*                                                                                                                                                                                          
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Highest-grossing Russian films

Festivals
---------

-   Moscow International Film Festival
-   Kinotavr (in Sochi)
-   Pacific Meridian (in Vladivostok)
-   
    :   ru:Киношок Kinoshock (in Anapa)


