The **cinema of the Soviet Union**, not to be confused with "Cinema of
Russia" despite films in the Russian language being predominant in the
body of work so described, includes films produced by the constituent
republics of the Soviet Union reflecting elements of their pre-Soviet
culture, language and history, albeit they were all regulated by the
Central Government in Moscow. Most prolific in their republican films,
after the Russian SFSR, were the Armenian SSR, Azerbaijan SSR, Georgian
SSR, Ukrainian SSR, and, to a lesser degree, Lithuanian SSR,
Byelorussian SSR and Moldavian SSR. At the same time, the nation's film
industry, which was fully nationalized throughout most of the country's
history, was guided by philosophies and laws propounded by the monopoly
Soviet Communist Party which introduced a new view on the cinema,
socialist realism, which was different from the one before or after the
existence of the Soviet Union.

Historical outline
------------------

Image:Bronenosets.jpg|thumb|left|300px|A 1926 Soviet poster for *The
Battleship Potemkin*. The new state, the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, officially came into existence on December 30, 1922. From the
outset, this new republic held that film would be the most ideal
propaganda tool for the Soviet Union because of its widespread
popularity among the established citizenry of the new land; Vladimir
Lenin, in fact, declared it the most important medium for educating the
masses in the ways, means and successes of Communism, a position which
was later echoed by Joseph Stalin. Meanwhile, between World War I and
the Russian Revolution, the film industry, and the infrastructure needed
to support it (e.g., electrical power) had deteriorated to the point of
unworkability. The majority of cinemas had been in the corridor between
Moscow and St. Petersburg, and most were out of commission.
Additionally, many of the performers, producers, directors and other
artists of pre-Soviet Russia, had fled the country or were moving ahead
of the Red Army forces as they pushed further and further south into
what remained of the Russian Empire. Furthermore, the new government did
not have the funds to spare for an extensive reworking of the system of
filmmaking. Thus, they initially opted for project approval and
censorship guidelines while leaving what remained of the industry in
private hands. As this amounted mostly to cinema houses, the first
Soviet films consisted of recycled films of the Russian Empire and its
imports, to the extent that these were not determined to be offensive to
the new Soviet ideology. Ironically, the first new film released in
Soviet Russia did not exactly fit this mold: this was *Father Sergius*,
a religious film completed during the last weeks of the Russian Empire
but not yet exhibited. It appeared on Soviet screens in 1918.

Beyond this, the government was principally able to fund only short,
educational films, the most notorious of which were the agitki -
propaganda films intended to "agitate", or energize and enthuse, the
masses to participate fully in approved Soviet activities, and deal
effectively with those who remained in opposition to the new order.
These short (often one small reel) films were often simple visual aids
and accompaniments to live lectures and speeches, and were carried from
city to city, town to town, village to village (along with the
lecturers) to indoctrinate the entire countryside, even reaching areas
where film had not been previously seen.

Newsreels, as documentaries, were the other major form of earliest
Soviet cinema. Dziga Vertov's newsreel series *Kino-Pravda*, the best
known of these, lasted from 1922 to 1925 and had a propagandistic bent;
Vertov used the series to promote socialist realism but also to
experiment with cinema.

Still, in 1921, there was not one functioning cinema in Moscow until
late in the year. Its rapid success, utilizing old Russian and imported
feature films, jumpstarted the industry significantly, especially
insofar as the government did not heavily or directly regulate what was
shown, and by 1923 an additional 89 cinemas had opened. Despite
extremely high taxation of ticket sales and film rentals, there was an
incentive for individuals to begin making feature film product again -
there were places to show the films - albeit they now had to conform
their subject matter to a Soviet world view. In this context, the
directors and writers who had remained in support of the objectives of
Communism assumed quick dominance in the industry, as they were the ones
who could most reliably and convincingly turn out films that would
satisfy government censors.Image:Ballada2.jpg|thumb|Screenshot from
Grigori Chukhrai's *Ballad of a Soldier* (1959). New talent joined the
experienced remainder, and an artistic community assembled with the goal
of defining "Soviet film" as something distinct and better from the
output of "decadent capitalism". The leaders of this community viewed it
essential to this goal to be free to experiment with the entire nature
of film, a position which would result in several well-known creative
efforts but would also result in an unforeseen counter-reaction by the
increasingly solidifying administrators of the government-controlled
society.

Sergei Eisenstein's *Battleship Potemkin* was released to wide acclaim
in 1925; the film was heavily fictionalized and also propagandistic,
preaching the party line about the virtues of the proletariat. The party
leaders soon found it difficult to control directors' expression, partly
because definitive understanding of a film's meaning was elusive.

One of the most popular films released in the 1930s was *Circus*.
Immediately after the end of the Second World War, color movies such as
*The Stone Flower* (1946), *Ballad of Siberia* (1947), and *The Kuban
Kossacks* (1949) were released. Other notable films from the 1940s
include *Alexander Nevsky* and *Ivan the Terrible*.

In the late 1950s and early 1960s Soviet Cinema produced *Ballad of a
Soldier*, which won the 1961 BAFTA Award for Best Film, and *The Cranes
Are Flying*.

*Height* is considered to be one of the best films of the 1950s (it also
became the foundation of the bard movement).

In the 1980s there was a diversification of subject matter. Touchy
issues could now be discussed openly. The results were films like
*Pokayanie* (*Repentance (film)*), which dealt with Stalinist
repressions in Georgia, and the allegorical science fiction movie
*Kin-dza-dza!*.

Censorship
----------

After the death of Stalin, Soviet filmmakers were given a free hand to
film what they believed audiences wanted to see in their film's
characters and stories. However, the industry remained a part of the
government and any material that was found politically offensive or
undesirable, was either removed, edited, reshot, or shelved. In rare
cases the filmmakers managed to convince the government of the innocence
of their work and the film was released. The definition of "socialist
realism" was liberalized to allow development of more human characters,
but communism still had to remain uncriticized in its fundamentals.
Additionally, the degree of relative artistic liberality was changed
from administration to administration.

Oddities created by censorship include:

-   The first chapter of the epic film Liberation (film
    series)|*Liberation* (*Освобождение*) was filmed 20 years after the
    subsequent three parts. The film's director, Yuri Ozerov, had
    refused to minimize the errors of the Soviet High Command during the
    first year of the war, and instead waited for a time when he could
    film this portion accurately.
-   Sergei Eisenstein's *Ivan the Terrible* Part II was completed in
    1945 but was not released until 1958; 5 years after Stalin's death.
-   Eisenstein's *Alexander Nevsky* was censored before the German
    invasion of the Soviet Union due to its depiction of a strong
    Russian leader defying an invading army of German Teutonic Knights.
    After the invasion, the film was released for propaganda purposes to
    considerable critical acclaim.

Revolution and Civil War
------------------------

The first Soviet Russian state film organization, the Film Subdepartment
of the People's Commissariat of Education, was established in 1917. The
work of the nationalized motion-picture studios was administered by the
All-Russian Photography and Motion Picture Department, which was
recognized in 1923 into Goskino, which in 1926 became Sovkino. The
world's first state-filmmaking school, the First State School of
Cinematography, was established in Moscow in 1919.

During the Russian Civil War, agitation trains and ships visited
soldiers, workers, and peasants. Lectures, reports, and political
meetings were accompanied by newsreels about events at the various
fronts.

1920s
-----

In the 1920s, the documentary film group headed by Vertov blazed the
trail from the conventional newsreel to the "imagecentered publicistic
film", which became the basis of the Russian film documentary. Typical
of the 1920s were the topical news serial *Kino-Pravda* and the film
*Forward, Soviet!* by Vertov, whose experiments and achievements in
documentary films influenced the development of Russian and world
cinematography. Other important films of the 1920s were Shub's
historical-revolutionary films such as *The Fall of the Romanov
Dynasty*. The film *Hydropeat* by Yu. Zheliabuzhsky marked the beginning
of popular science films. Feature-length agitation films in 1918-21 were
important in the development of the film industry. Innovation in Russian
filmmaking was expressed particularly in the work of Eisenstein. *The
Battleship Potemkin* was noteworthy for its innovative montage and
metaphorical quality of its film language. It won world acclaim.
Eisenstein developed concepts of the revolutionary epic in the film
*October: Ten Days That Shook the World|October*. Also noteworthy was
Pudovkin's adaptation of Gorky's *Mother* to the screen in 1926.
Pudovkin developed themes of revolutionary history in the film *The End
of St. Petersburg* (1927). Other noteworthy silent films were films
dealing with contemporary life such as Barnet's *The House on Trubnaya*.
The films of Protazanov were devoted to the revolutionary struggle and
the shaping of a new way of life, such as *Don Diego and Pelageia*
(1928). Ukrainian director Dovzhenko was noteworthy for the
historical-revolutionary epic *Zvenigora*, the *Arsenal* and the poetic
film *Earth*.

1930s
-----

In the early 1930s, Russian filmmakers applied socialist realism to
their work. Among the most outstanding films was *Chapaev*, a film about
Russian revolutionaries and society during the Revolution and Civil War.
Revolutionary history was developed in films such as *Golden Mountains*
by Sergei Yutkevich, *The Outskirts* by Boris Barnet, and the Maxim
trilogy by Grigori Kozintsev and Leonid Trauberg: *The Youth of Maxim*,
*The Return of Maxim*, and *The Vyborg Side*. Also notable were
biographical films about Vladimir Lenin such as Mikhail Romm's *Lenin in
October* and *Lenin in 1918*. The life of Russian society and everyday
people were depicted in films such as *Courageous Seven* and *City of
Youth* by Sergei Gerasimov. The comedies of Grigori Aleksandrov such as
*Circus*, *Volga-Volga*, and *The Shining Path* as well as *The Rich
Bride* by Ivan Pyryev and *By the Bluest of Seas* by Boris Barnet focus
on the psychology of the common person, enthusiasm for work and
intolerance for remnants of the past. Many films focused on national
heroes, including *Alexander Nevsky* by Sergei Eisenstein, *Minin and
Pozharsky* by Vsevolod Pudovkin, and *Bogdan Khmelnitsky* by Igor
Savchenko. There were adaptations of literary classics, particularly
Mark Donskoy's trilogy of films about Maxim Gorky: *The Childhood of
Maxim Gorky*, *My Apprenticeship*, and *My Universities*.

During the late 1920s and early 1930s the Stalinist wing of the
Communist Party consolidated its authority and set about transforming
the Soviet Union on both the economic and cultural fronts. The economy
moved from the market-based New Economic Policy (NEP) to a system of
central planning. The new leadership declared a "cultural revolution" in
which the party would exercise tight control over cultural affairs,
including artistic expression. Cinema existed at the intersection of art
and economics; so it was destined to be thoroughly reorganized in this
episode of economic and cultural transformation.

To implement central planning in cinema, the new bureaucratic entity
Soyuzkino was created in 1930. All the hitherto autonomous studios and
distribution networks that had grown up under NEP's market would now be
coordinated in their activities by this planning agency. Soyuzkino's
authority also extended to the studios of the national republics such as
VUFKU, which had enjoyed more independence during the 1920s. Soyuzkino
consisted of an extended bureaucracy of economic planners and policy
specialists who were charged to formulate annual production plans for
the studios and then to monitor the distribution and exhibition of
finished films.

With central planning came more centralized authority over creative
decision making. Script development became a long, torturous process
under this bureaucratic system, with various committees reviewing drafts
and calling for cuts or revisions. In the 1930s censorship became more
exacting with each passing year, in a manner that paralleled the
increasing cultural repression of the Stalinist regime. Feature film
projects would drag out for months or years and might be terminated at
any point

Alexander Dovzhenko drew from Ukrainian folk culture in such films as
*Zemlya* (*Earth*, 1930) along the way because of the capricious
decision of one or another censoring committee. Such redundant oversight
slowed down production and inhibited creativity. Although central
planning was supposed to increase the film industry's productivity,
production levels declined steadily through the 1930s. The industry was
releasing over one-hundred features annually at the end of the NEP
period, but that figure fell to seventy by 1932 and to forty-five by
1934. It never again reached triple digits during the remainder of the
Stalin era. Veteran directors experienced precipitous career declines
under this system of bureaucratic control; whereas Eisenstein was able
to make four features between 1924 and 1929, he completed only one film,
*Alexander Nevsky* (1938) during the entire decade of the 1930s. His
planned adaptation of the Ivan Turgenev story Bezhin lug (Bezhin Meadow,
1935–1937) was halted during production in 1937 and officially banned,
one of many promising film projects that fell victim to an exacting
censorship system.

Meanwhile, the USSR cut off its film contacts with the West. It stopped
importing films after 1931 out of concern that foreign films exposed
audiences to capitalist ideology. The industry also freed itself from
dependency on foreign technologies. During its industrialization effort
of the early 1930s, the USSR finally built an array of factories to
supply the film industry with the nation's own technical resources.

To secure independence from the West, industry leaders mandated that the
USSR develop its own sound technologies, rather than taking licenses on
Western sound systems. Two Soviet scientists, Alexander Shorin in
Leningrad (formerly St. Petersburg) and Pavel Tager in Moscow, conducted
research through the late 1920s on complementary sound systems, which
were ready for use by 1930. The implementation process, including the
cost of refitting movie theaters, proved daunting, and the USSR did not
complete the transition to sound until 1935. Nevertheless, several
directors made innovative use of sound once the technology became
available. In Entuziazm: Simfoniya Donbassa (Enthusiasm, 1931), his
documentary on coal mining and heavy industry, Vertov based his
soundtrack on an elegantly orchestrated array of industrial noises. In
*Dezertir* (*The Deserter*, 1933) Pudovkin experimented with a form of
"sound counterpoint" by exploiting tensions and ironic dissonances
between sound elements and the image track. And in Alexander Nevsky,
Eisenstein collaborated with the composer Sergei Prokofiev on an
"operatic" film style that elegantly coordinated the musical score and
the image track.

As Soviet cinema made the transition to sound and central planning in
the early 1930s, it was also put under a mandate to adopt a uniform film
style, commonly identified as "socialist realism". In 1932 the party
leadership ordered the literary community to abandon the avant-garde
practices of the 1920s and to embrace socialist realism, a literary
style that, in practice, was actually close to 19th-century realism. The
other arts, including cinema, were subsequently instructed to develop
the aesthetic equivalent. For cinema, this meant adopting a film style
that would be legible to a broad audience, thus avoiding a possible
split between the avant-garde and mainstream cinema that was evident in
the late 1920s. The director of Soyuzkino and chief policy officer for
the film industry, Boris Shumyatsky (1886–1938), who served from 1931 to
1938, was a harsh critic of the montage aesthetic. He championed a
"cinema for the millions", which would use clear, linear narration.
Although American movies were no longer being imported in the 1930s, the
Hollywood model of continuity editing was readily available, and it had
a successful track record with Soviet movie audiences. Soviet socialist
realism was built on this style, which assured tidy storytelling.
Various guidelines were then added to the doctrine: positive heroes to
act as role models for viewers; lessons in good citizenship for
spectators to embrace; and support for reigning policy decisions of the
Communist Party.

Such restrictive aesthetic policies, enforced by the rigorous censorship
apparatus of Soyuzkino, resulted in a number of formulaic and
doctrinaire films. Apparently, they did succeed in sustaining a true
"cinema of the masses". The 1930s witnessed some stellar examples of
popular cinema. The single most successful film of the decade, in terms
of both official praise and genuine affection from the mass audience,
was Chapayev (1934), co-directed by Prokofiev (1900–1959) and Grigori
Vasiliev. Based on the life of a martyred Red Army commander, the film
was touted as a model of socialist realism, in that Chapayev and his
followers battled heroically for the revolutionary cause. The film also
humanized the title character, giving him personal foibles, an ironic
sense of humour, and a rough peasant charm. These qualities endeared him
to the viewing public: spectators reported seeing the film multiple
times during its first run in 1934, and Chapayev was periodically
re-released for subsequent generations of audiences.

A genre that emerged in the 1930s to consistent popular acclaim was the
musical comedy, and a master of that form was Grigori Aleksandrov
(1903–1984). He effected a creative partnership with his wife, the
brilliant comic actress and chanteuse Lyubov Orlova (1902–1975), in a
series of crowd-pleasing musicals. Their pastoral comedy Volga-Volga
(1938) was surpassed only by Chapayev in terms of box-office success.
The fantasy element of their films, with lively musical numbers reviving
the montage aesthetic, sometimes stretched the boundaries of socialist
realism, but the genre could also allude to contemporary affairs. In
Aleksandrov's 1940 musical *Svetlyi Put* (*The Shining Path*), Orlova
plays a humble servant girl who rises through the ranks of the Soviet
industrial leadership after developing clever labour-saving work
methods. Audiences could enjoy the film's comic turn on the Cinderella
story while also learning about the value of efficiency in the
workplace.

1940s
-----

Immediately after the end of the Second World War, color movies such as
*The Stone Flower* (1946), *Ballad of Siberia* (1947), and *Cossacks of
the Kuban* (1949) were released. Other notable films from the 1940s
include the black and white films, *Alexander Nevsky*, *Ivan the
Terrible* and the *Encounter at the Elbe*.

The Soviet film industry suffered during the period after World War II.
On top of dealing with the severe physical and monetary losses of the
war, Stalin’s regime tightened social control and censorship in order to
manage the effects recent exposure to the West had on the people. The
postwar period was marked by an end of almost all autonomy in the Soviet
Union; the heavy control now exerted by the government ended filmmaking
as an art form. The *Catalogue of Soviet Films* recorded remarkably low
numbers of films being produced from 1945 to 1953, with as few as nine
films produced in 1951 and a maximum of twenty-three produced in 1952.
These numbers also include many works which cannot fairly be considered
as films in a traditional sense, with a large percentage of them being
filmed versions of staged performances, short films for children, and
experimental stereoscopic films. In reality, no more than four or five
films reached Soviet audiences by the early 1950s. Compared to the four
hundred to five hundred films produced every year by Hollywood, the
Soviet film industry was practically dead.

Even as the economy of the Soviet Union strengthened, film production
continued to decrease. A resolution passed by the Council of Ministers
in 1948 further crippled the film industry. The resolution criticized
the work of the industry, saying that an emphasis placed on quantity
over quality had ideologically weakened the films. Instead, the council
insisted that every film produced must be a masterpiece for promoting
communist ideas and the Soviet system. Often, Stalin had the ultimate
decision on whether a newly produced film was appropriate for public
viewing. In private screenings after meetings of the Politburo, the
Minister of the Film Industry Igor Bol’shakov privately screened films
for Stalin and top members of Soviet government. Filmmakers from the
time say that Stalin usually determined the fate of the films in one
sentence, and as a result, many of the few films produced would not be
seen in theaters until many years later. The strict limitations on
content and complex, centralized process for approval drove many
screenwriters away, and studios had much difficulty producing any of the
quality films mandated by the 1948 resolution.

### Trophy Films

Movie theaters in the postwar period faced the problem of satisfying the
growing appetites of Soviet audiences for films while dealing with the
shortage of newly produced works from studios. In response, cinemas
played the same films for months at a time, many of them the works of
the late 1930s. Anything new drew millions of people to the box office,
and many theaters screened foreign films to attract larger audiences.
Most of these foreign films were “trophy films,” two thousand films
brought into the country by the Red Army after the occupation of Germany
and Eastern Europe in World War II. In the top secret minutes for the
CPSU Committee Meeting on August 31, 1948, the committee permitted the
Minister of the Film Industry to release fifty of these films in the
Soviet Union. Of these fifty, Bol’shakov was only allowed to release
twenty-four for screening to the general public, mainly films made in
Germany, Austria, Italy, and France. The other twenty-six films,
consisting almost entirely of American films, were only allowed to be
shown in private screenings. The minutes also include a separate list of
permitted German musical films, which were mainly German and Italian
film adaptations of famous operas. Most of the “trophy films” were
released in 1948-1949, but somewhat strangely, compiled lists of the
released films include ones not previously mentioned in the official
minutes of the Central Committee.

The public release of these “trophy films” seems very contradictory in
the context of the 1940s Soviet Union. The Soviet government allowed the
exhibition of foreign films which contained far more subversive ideas
than any a Soviet director would have ever attempted putting in a film
at a time when Soviet artists found themselves unemployed because of
censorship laws. Historians hypothesize many possible reasons why the
Soviet government showed such seemingly inexplicable leniency toward the
foreign films. It could be that the frivolity and glamour of the Western
films served as a necessary distraction for the populace away from the
problematic truths of Soviet life at the time. The government may have
granted cinemas the right to show the films so they could stay in
business after the domestic film industry had declined. A third
hypothesis speculates that the government saw the films as an easy
source of money to help rebuild the nation after the war. The minutes of
the CPSU Central Committee meeting seem to support the latter idea with
instructions that the films are to bring in a net income of at least 750
million rubles to the State coffers over the course of a year from
public and private screenings, and 250 million rubles of this were
supposed to come from rentals to the trade union camera network.

In addition to releasing the films, the committee also charged
Bol’shakov and the Agitation and Propaganda Department of the CPSU
Central Committee “with making the necessary editorial corrections to
the films and with providing an introductory text and carefully edited
subtitles for each film.” In general, the captured Nazi films were
considered apolitical enough to be shown to the general populace. Still
the Propaganda and Agitation Section of the Central Committee ran into
trouble with the censoring of two films slated for release. The censors
found it impossible to remove the Zionism|“Zionist” ideas from *Jud
Suss*, an anti-Semitic, Nazi propaganda film, a fact which really speaks
to the anti-Semitic nature of the top members of Soviet government. The
censors also had trouble with a film adaptation of *Of Mice and Men*
because of the representation of the poor as a detriment to society.

There is very little direct evidence of how Soviet audiences received
the trophy films. Soviet magazines or newspapers never reviewed the
films, there were no audience surveys, and no records exist of how many
people viewed the films. In order to judge the reception and popularity
of these foreign films, historians have mainly relied on anecdotal
evidence. The German musical comedy *The Woman of My Dreams* has
received mixed reviews according to this evidence. *Kul’tura i Zhizn’*
published a supposed survey compiled of readers’ letters to the editor
in March, 1947 which criticize the film for being idealess, low brow,
and even harmful. Bulat Okudzhava wrote a contradicting viewpoint in
*Druzhba narodov* in 1986, saying that everyone in the city of Tbilisi
was crazy about the film. According to him, everywhere he went people
were talking about the film and whistling the songs. Of the two
accounts, film historians generally consider Okudzhava’s more reliable
than the one presented by *Kul’tura i Zhizn’*. Films such as His
Butler's Sister|*His Butler’s Sister* and *Sun Valley Serenade* were
highly popular with Soviet audiences. In *Vecherniaia Moskva* (October
4, 1946), M. Chistiakov reprimanded theaters and the Soviet film
industry for the fact that over a six-month timespan, sixty of the films
shown had been tasteless Western films rather than Soviet ones. Even in
criticism of the films and the crusading efforts of the
anti-cosmopolitan campaign against the trophy films, it is clear to see
they had quite an impact on Soviet society.

1950s
-----

With the start of the Cold War, writers, still considered the primary
auteurs, were all the more reluctant to take up script writing, and the
early 1950s saw only a handful of feature films completed during any
year. The death of Stalin was a merciful relief to many, and all the
more so was the official trashing of his public image as a benign and
competent leader by Nikita Khrushchev two years later. This latter event
gave filmmakers the margin of comfort they needed to move away from the
narrow formula stories of socialist realism, expand its boundaries, and
begin work on a wider range of entertaining and artistic Soviet films.

Notable films include:

-   *The Cranes Are Flying*, directed at Mosfilm by the Georgian-born
    director Mikhail Kalatozov in 1957. It won the Palme d'Or at the
    1958 Cannes Film Festival.

1960s-70s
---------

The 1960s and 1970s saw the creation of many films, many of which molded
Soviet and post-Soviet culture. They include:

-   *I Step Through Moscow* (1963)
-   *Operation Y and Other Shurik's Adventures* (1965) and its sequel,
    *Kidnapping, Caucasian Style* (1966)
-   *War and Peace* (1966–67) Sergei Bondarchuk's adaption of Tolstoy's
    novel, with a budget of 8.5 million rubles, a running time of seven
    hours, and utilizing thousands of extras. It was the first Russian
    film to receive an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.
-   *Andrei Rublev* (1966) won various international awards, such as
    FIPRESCI.
-   *The Colour of Pomegranates* (1968) had a limited release inside the
    Soviet Union and wasn't seen abroad until years later, but has
    received critical acclaim since.
-   *The Diamond Arm* (1968), the last four comedies, especially
    *Diamond Arm*, have contributed a lot of humorous quotes.
-   *White Sun of the Desert* (1970), a classic "Eastern", although with
    dubious stereotyping of central Asians. It is ritually watched by
    cosmonauts before launches, and has contributed many quotes to the
    Russian language such as 'The East is a delicate matter'. Its theme
    tune became a huge hit.
-   *Solaris* (1972)
-   *Gentlemen of Fortune* (1972) starring Yevgeny Leonov

-   *The Irony of Fate, or Enjoy Your Bath!* (1975)
-   *Office Romance* (1977)
-   Moscow Does Not Believe In Tears (1979) won an Academy Award for
    Best Foreign Language Film in 1980.

Soviet films tend to be rather culture-specific and are difficult for
many foreigners to understand without having been exposed to the culture
first. Various Soviet directors were more concerned with artistic
success than with economical success (They were paid by the academy, and
so money was not a critical issue). This contributed to the creation of
a large number of more philosophical and poetical films. Most well-known
examples of such films are those by directors Andrei Tarkovsky, Sergei
Parajanov and Nikita Mikhalkov. In keeping with Russian character,
tragi-comedies were very popular. These decades were also prominent in
the production of the Eastern or Red Western.

Animation was a respected genre, with many directors experimenting with
technique. *Tale of Tales* (1979) by Yuriy Norshteyn was twice given the
title of "Best Animated Film of All Eras and Nations" by animation
professionals from around the world, in 1984 and 2002.

In the year of the 60th anniversary of the Soviet cinema (1979), on
April 25, a decision of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR
established a commemorative "Day of the Soviet cinema". It was then
celebrated in the USSR each year on August 27, the day on which Vladimir
Lenin signed a decree to nationalise the country's cinematic and
photographic industries.

1980s
-----

The policies of perestroika and glasnost saw a loosening of the
censorship of earlier eras. A genre known as "chernukha" (from the
Russian word for "gore"), including films such as *Little Vera*,
portrayed the harsh realities of Soviet life. Notable films of this
period include:

-   *The Pokrovsky Gate* (1982) a made-for-television comedy starring
    Oleg Menshikov
-   *Repentance* a.k.a. *The Confession* (1984), a Georgian film about a
    fictional dictator which was banned until 1987.
-   *Come and See* (1985) a widely acclaimed World War II drama
-   *Kin-dza-dza!* (1986) allegorical science fiction
-   *The Cold Summer of 1953* (1987) about criminals being released from
    the gulags after Stalin's death.
-   *Little Vera* (1988) notable as one of the first Soviet films with
    sexually explicit scenes

Soviet films
------------

There are many movies which are well-remembered and looked upon fondly
in the former Soviet republics; famous lines or jokes from these movies
are often quoted and some have even become a part of the Russian
language as sayings and idioms. Most of these classic Soviet movies were
produced by Mosfilm and other state-owned film studios.

Genres
------

### Action

-   *White Sun of the Desert*, one of the best loved Soviet films of all
    time. For more information on this type of movie, see Red Western.

### Science fiction

-   *Aelita*, a 1924 silent film directed by Yakov Protazanov based on
    Alexei Tolstoy's novel of the same name
-   *Solaris* and *Stalker* by Andrey Tarkovsky
-   *Kin-dza-dza!*, a 1986 dystopian comedy/science fiction film by
    Georgi Daneliya

### Comedy

-   *Gentlemen of Fortune*, a kindergarten principal played by Evgeni
    Leonov pretends to be a criminal boss called the Professor (who
    looks exactly like him) in order to gain information about a stolen
    artifact from the Professor's two lackeys.
-   *Kidnapping, Caucasian Style*. A lot of ethnic humor, as Shurik gets
    involved unwittingly in kidnapping. It's also a satire of corrupt
    local officials.
-   *Ivan Vasilievich: Back to the Future*, a scientist's time travel
    machine ends up teleporting his tenement administrator into 16th
    century Russia and bringing Ivan the Terrible into the present. The
    two are identical in appearance and chaos promptly ensues.
-   *The Twelve Chairs* - based on the famous novel of the same name by
    Ilf and Petrov.
-   *The Diamond Arm* - starring Yuri Nikulin, Anatoli Papanov, and
    Andrei Mironov. Inept smugglers try to recover diamonds which ended
    up with the wrong man.
-   *The Pokrovsky Gate* - starring Oleg Menshikov as a young student
    who comes to Moscow and finds himself involved in the misfortunes of
    his fellow apartment tenants.

### Drama/Epic

-   *The Irony of Fate, or Enjoy Your Bath!*, a comedy-drama so beloved
    in Russia that it is broadcast on television every New Year Eve,
    similarly to the American movie *It’s a Wonderful Life* being
    broadcast every Christmas.
-   *The Meeting Place Cannot Be Changed*, a 1979 miniseries set in
    1945. Vladimir Vysotsky plays a no-nonsense cop trying to catch the
    deadly Black Cat gang.
-   *An Ordinary Miracle* and its remake, a fairy-tale love story about
    a bear who has been transformed into a man by a wizard, and must be
    kissed by a princess to return to his original form.
-   *And Quiet Flows the Don* (1957-8) by Sergei Gerasimov - an
    adaptation of the Nobel prize winning novel *And Quiet Flows the
    Don*.
-   *War and Peace*, a version of Tolstoy's novel as giant as the
    original.

### Children's films

-   *Ilya Muromets*, based on the byliny tales film by Aleksandr
    Ptushko.
-   *Jack Frost*, Christmas tale by Aleksandr Rou.
-   *Moscow-Cassiopeia and Teens in the Universe*, science fiction films
    by Richard Viktorov.
-   *The Adventures of Buratino*, adaptation of The Adventures of
    Pinocchio, by Leonid Nechayev.
-   *The Mystery of the Third Planet*, famous animated movie based on
    Alice: The Girl from Earth books by writer Kir Bulychov
-   *Raz, dva - gore ne beda*, pacifistic horror film by Mikhail
    Yuzovsky and Yuli Kim.
-   *Mio in the Land of Faraway*, fantasy film directed by Vladimir
    Grammatikov.

Notable filmmakers
------------------

Early personalities in the development of Soviet cinema:

-   Mikheil Chiaureli
-   Grigori Aleksandrov
-   Sergei Bondarchuk
-   Alexander Dovzhenko
-   Sergei Eisenstein
-   Grigori Kozintsev
-   Lev Kuleshov
-   Yakov Protazanov
-   Vsevolod Pudovkin
-   Ivan Pyryev
-   Boris Shumyatsky
-   Leonid Trauberg
-   Dziga Vertov

Later personalities:

-   Tengiz Abuladze
-   Andrei Konchalovsky
-   Nikita Mikhalkov
-   Aleksandr Sokurov
-   Andrei Tarkovsky
-   Aleksei German
-   Elem Klimov
-   Larissa Shepitko
-   Eldar Ryazanov
-   Leonid Gaidai
-   Georgi Daneliya
-   Kira Muratova
-   Sergei Parajanov

Soviet studios
--------------

-   Armenfilm
-   Azerbaijanfilm
-   Belarusfilm
-   Georgiafilm
-   Gorky Film Studio
-   Gruziya-film
-   Kazakhfilm
-   Kyivnaukfilm

-   Kirgizfilm
-   Lenfilm
-   Lithuanian Film Studio
-   Moldova-Film
-   Mosfilm
-   Dovzhenko Film Studios
-   Odessa Cinema Studio
-   Pilot

-   Rīgas kinostudija
-   Soyuzmultfilm
-   Sverdlovsk Film Studio
-   Tadjikfilm
-   Tallinnfilm
-   Turkmenfilm
-   Uzbekfilm
-   Yalta Film Studio

