The **economy of Russia** is the eighth largest economy in the world by
nominal value and the List of countries by GDP (PPP)|sixth/ fifth
largest by purchasing power parity (PPP).

The Russian economy is currently labeled as a high income economy by the
World Bank. The country has an abundance of natural resources, including
timber, precious metals, and particularly fossil fuels (oil, natural
gas, and coal) that can be developed without the constraint of OPEC
production quotas and other rules (Russia is not an OPEC member). In
recent years, Russia's oil and gas production and pipeline projects have
been not only a primary source of Russia's economic growth but also a
geostrategic lever in the country's relationship with Europe and Asia.

Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia has undergone significant
changes, moving from a centrally planned economy to a more market-based
and globally integrated economy. Economic reforms of the shock therapy
in the late 1980s and during 1990s privatized many sectors of industry
and agriculture, with notable exceptions in the energy and
defense-related sectors. Nonetheless, the rapid privatization process,
including a much criticized "loans-for-shares" scheme that turned over
major state-owned firms to politically connected "oligarchs", has left
equity ownership highly concentrated. As of 2011, Russia's capital,
Moscow, had the highest number of billionaires of any city in the world.

In late 2008 and early 2009, Russia experienced the first recession
after ten years of experiencing a rising economy, until stable growth
resumed in late 2009 and 2010. Despite the deep but brief recession, the
economy has not been as seriously affected by the global financial
crisis, largely because of the integration of short-term macroeconomic
policies that helped the economy survive, as well as low levels of
sovereign debt. The Russian Government predicts growth rates for future
years at 2.5% of GDP.

Economic history
----------------

The two important and independent goals – macroeconomic stabilization
and economic restructuring – are indicators for a transition from
central planning to a market-based economy. The former entailed
implementing fiscal and monetary policies that promote economic growth
in an environment of stable prices and exchange rates. The latter
required establishing commercial, and institutional entities – banks,
private property, and commercial legal codes— that permit the economy to
operate efficiently. Opening domestic markets to foreign trade and
investment, thus linking the economy with the rest of the world, was an
important aid in reaching these goals. The Gorbachev regime failed to
address these fundamental goals. At the time of the Soviet Union's
demise, the Yeltsin government of the Russian Republic had begun to
attack the problems of macroeconomic stabilization and economic
restructuring. By mid-1996, results were mixed.

Since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia has tried to
develop a market economy and achieve consistent economic growth. In
October 1991, Yeltsin announced that Russia would proceed with radical,
market-oriented reform along the lines of "shock therapy", as
recommended by the United States and IMF. However, this policy resulted
in economic collapse, with millions being plunged into poverty and
corruption and crime spreading rapidly. Hyperinflation resulted from the
removal of Soviet price controls and again following the 1998 Russian
financial crisis. Assuming the role as the sequel to the legal
personality of the Soviet Union, Russia took up the responsibility for
settling the USSR's external debts, even though its population made up
just half of the population of the USSR at the time of its dissolution.
When once all enterprises belonged to the state and were supposed to be
equally owned amongst all citizens, they fell into the hands of a few,
who became immensely rich. Stocks of state-owned enterprises were
issued, and these new publicly traded companies were quickly handed to
the members of Nomenklatura or known criminal bosses. For example, the
director of a factory during the Soviet regime would often become the
owner of the same enterprise. During the same period, violent criminal
groups often took over state enterprises, clearing the way by
assassinations or extortion. Corruption of government officials became
an everyday rule of life. Under the government's cover, outrageous
financial manipulations were performed that enriched the narrow group of
individuals at key positions of the business and government mafia. Many
took billions in cash and assets outside of the country in an enormous
capital flight. That being said, there were corporate raiders such as
Andrei Volgin engaged in hostile takeovers of corrupt corporations by
the mid-1990s.

The largest state enterprises were controversially privatized by
President Boris Yeltsin and subsequently owned by insiders for far less
than they were worth. Many Russians consider these infamous "oligarchs"
to be thieves.

### Recovery

The Russian economy underwent tremendous stress as it moved from a
centrally planned economy to a free market system. Difficulties in
implementing fiscal reforms aimed at raising government revenues and a
dependence on short-term borrowing to finance budget deficits led to a
serious financial crisis in 1998. Lower prices for Russia's major export
earners (oil and minerals) and a loss of investor confidence due to the
Asian financial crisis exacerbated financial problems. The result was a
rapid decline in the value of the ruble, flight of foreign investment,
delayed payments on sovereign and private debts, a breakdown of
commercial transactions through the banking system, and the threat of
runaway inflation.

Russia, however, appears to have weathered the crisis relatively well.
As of 2009 real GDP increased by the highest percentage since the fall
of the Soviet Union at 8.1%, the ruble remains stable, inflation has
been moderate, and investment began to increase again. In 2007 the World
Bank declared that the Russian economy had achieved "unprecedented
macroeconomic stability". Russia is making progress in meeting its
foreign debts obligations. During 2000–01, Russia not only met its
external debt services but also made large advance repayments of
principal on IMF loans but also built up Central Bank reserves with
government budget, trade, and current account surpluses. The FY 2002
Russian Government budget assumes payment of roughly \$14 billion in
official debt service payments falling due. Large current account
surpluses have brought a rapid appreciation of the ruble over the past
several years. This has meant that Russia has given back much of the
terms-of-trade advantage that it gained when the ruble fell by 60%
during the debt crisis. Oil and gas dominate Russian exports, so Russia
remains highly dependent upon the price of energy. Loan and deposit
rates at or below the inflation rate inhibit the growth of the banking
system and make the allocation of capital and risk much less efficient
than it would be otherwise.

In 2003, the debt has risen to \$19 billion due to higher Ministry of
Finance and Eurobond payments. However, \$1 billion of this has been
prepaid, and some of the private sector debt may already have been
repurchased. Russia continues to explore debt swap/exchange
opportunities.

In the June 2002 G8 Summit, leaders of the eight nations signed a
statement agreeing to explore cancellation of some of Russia's old
Soviet debt to use the savings for safeguarding materials in Russia that
could be used by terrorists. Under the proposed deal, \$10 billion would
come from the United States and \$10 billion from other G-8 countries
over 10 years.

On 1 January 2004, the Stabilization fund of the Russian Federation was
established by the Government of Russia as a part of the federal budget
to balance it if oil price falls. Now the Stabilization fund of the
Russian Federation is being modernized. Stabilization Fund of the
Russian Federation will be divided into two parts on 1 February 2008.
The first part will become a reserve fund equal to 10 percent of GDP
(10% of GDP equals to about \$200 billion now), and will be invested in
a similar way as Stabilization Fund of the Russian Federation. The
second part will be turned into the National Prosperity Fund of Russian
Federation. Deputy Finance Minister Sergei Storchak estimates it will
reach 600–700 billion rubles by 1 February 2008. The National Prosperity
Fund is to be invested into more risky instruments, including the shares
of foreign companies.

#### Putin's first presidency

Under the presidency of Vladimir Putin Russia's economy saw the nominal
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) double, climbing from 22nd to 11th largest
in the world. The economy made real gains of an average 7% per year (
1999: 6.5%, 2000: 10%, 2001: 5.7%, 2002: 4.9%, 2003: 7.3%, 2004: 7.2%,
2005: 6.4%, 2006: 8.2%, 2007: 8.5%, 2008: 5.2% ), making it the 6th
largest economy in the world in GDP(PPP). In 2007, Russia's GDP exceeded
that of 1990, meaning it has overcome the devastating consequences of
the recession in the 1990s.

During Putin's eight years in office, the industry grew by 75%,
investments increased by 125%, and agricultural production and
construction increased as well. Real incomes more than doubled and the
average salary increased eightfold from \$80 to \$640. The volume of
consumer credit between 2000–2006 increased 45 times, and during that
same time period, the middle class grew from 8 million to 55 million, an
increase of 7 times. The number of people living below the poverty line
also decreased from 30% in 2000 to 14% in 2008.

Inflation remained a problem however, as the government failed to
contain the growth of prices. Between 1999–2007 inflation was kept at
the forecast ceiling only twice, and in 2007 the inflation exceeded that
of 2006, continuing an upward trend at the beginning of 2008.

The Russian economy is still commodity-driven despite its growth.
Payments from the fuel and energy sector in the form of customs duties
and taxes accounted for nearly half of the federal budget's revenues.
The large majority of Russia's exports are made up by raw materials and
fertilizers, although exports as a whole accounted for only 8.7% of the
GDP in 2007, compared to 20% in 2000.

#### Medvedev's presidency

Arms sales have increased to the point where Russia is second (60% of US
arms sales) in the world in sale of weapons, the IT industry has
recorded a record year of growth concentrating on high-end niches like
algorithm design and microelectronics; Russia is now the world's third
biggest destination for outsourcing software behind India and China. The
space launch industry is now the world's largest and nuclear power plant
companies are going from strength to strength, selling plants to China
and India, and recently signed a joint venture with Toshiba to develop
cutting edge power plants.

The civilian aerospace industry has developed the Sukhoi Superjet, as
well as the upcoming MS-21 project to compete with Boeing and Airbus.

The recent global economic downturn hit the Russian economy hard,
resulting in three major shocks to Russia's long-term economic growth,
though. Oil prices dropped from \$140 per barrel to \$40 per barrel, a
decrease in access to financing with an increase in sovereign and
corporate bond spreads, and the reversal of capital flow from
\$80 billion of in-flows to \$130 billion in out-flows have all served
to crush fledgling Russian economic growth. In January 2009, industrial
production was down almost 16% year to year, fixed capital investment
was down 15.5% year to year, and GDP had shrunk 9% year to year.
However, in the second quarter the GDP rose by 7.5 percent on a
quarterly basis indicating the beginning of economic recovery. Responses
to the recovery has been fast – Industrial Production growth remains one
of the highest in the world, Billionaires have grown vastly, and Moscow
now boasts the highest billionaire population, ahead of New York City.
More recently, after 16 years of negotiations, Russia's membership to
the WTO was accepted. In January 2012, Russia hit a record low of
inflation of just 4.2%. This record was broken only a month later in
February 2012 with inflation dropping to 3.7%. The Russian government,
however, expects inflation to be at an aggregate of approximately 6% in
2012.

Macro economy
-------------

### Gross domestic product

`per capita, 2008 (US dollars):`

]]

This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Russia at market
prices
[estimated](http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2006/01/data/dbcselm.cfm?G=2001)
by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Russian
Rubles.

  Year   Gross Domestic Product   US Dollar exchange
  ------ ------------------------ --------------------
  1995   1,428,500                4.55 Rubles
  2000   7,305,600                28.13 Rubles
  2005   21,665,000               28.27 Rubles
  2008   39,952,177               23.52 Rubles
  2009   39,952,177               30.20 Rubles

For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US Dollar is exchanged at
13.63 Rubles only. Average wages in 2007 hover around \$42–51 per day.

Russia's GDP, estimated at \$1,250 billion at 2007 exchange rates,
increased by 8.1% in 2007 compared to 2006. Russia is worth
\$395,000,000,000,000. Continued average inflation of approximately 10%
and strict government budget led to the growth, while lower oil prices
and ruble appreciation slowed it. As of November 2007, unemployment in
Russia was at 5.9%, The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in Russia expanded
2.90 percent in the third quarter of 2012 over the same quarter of the
previous year. GDP Annual Growth Rate in Russia is reported by the
Federal State Statistics Service. Historically, from 1996 until 2012,
Russia GDP Annual Growth Rate averaged 3.9 Percent reaching an all-time
high of 12.1 Percent in December 1999 and a record low of -11.2 Percent
in June 2009. Russia is the fifth largest economy in the world and is a
leading exporter of oil and natural gas. In Russia, services are the
biggest sector of the economy and account for 58 percent of GDP. Within
services the most important segments are: wholesale and retail trade,
repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles and personal and household goods
(17 percent of total GDP); public administration, health and education
(12 percent); real estate (9 percent) and transport storage and
communications (7 percent). Industry contributes 40 percent to total
output. Mining (11 percent of GDP), manufacturing (13 percent) and
construction (4 percent) are the most important industry segments.
Agriculture accounts for the remaining 2 percent.The Gross Domestic
Product per capita in Russia was last recorded at 3052.15 US dollars in
2011. The GDP per Capita in Russia is equivalent to 25 percent of the
world's average.

As of April 2008, the International Monetary Fund estimates that
Russia's gross domestic product (nominal) will grow from its 2007 value
of \$1,289,582 million to \$3,462,998 million by 2013, a 168% increase.
Its GDP PPP is estimated to grow from \$2,087,815 to \$3,330,623 in the
same time, which would make it the second largest economy in Europe in
terms of purchasing power.

### Monetary policy

The exchange rate stabilized in 1999; after falling from 6.5
rubles/dollar in April 1998 to about 25 rubles/dollar by August 1998,
one year later it had further depreciated only to about 28.5
rubles/dollar. As of June 2002, the exchange rate was 31.4
rubles/dollar, down from 29.2 rubles/dollar the year before. After some
large spikes in inflation following the August 1998 economic crisis,
inflation has declined steadily. Cumulative consumer price inflation for
2001 was at 18.6% slightly below the 20.2% inflation rate of the
previous year but above the inflation target set in the 2001 budget. The
Central Bank's accumulation of foreign reserves drove inflation higher
and that trend is expected to continue. By 2009, the estimated inflation
rate had decreased to 11.7%. Since that time Russian economic institutes
start to provide politic of "flexible" ruble. Step by step it is going
to be realized. As a result of the activity of Russian Central Bank,
Russian inflation reaches its record low after the breakup of the Soviet
Union in April 2012, at 3.6%.

### Fiscal policy

Central and local government expenditures are about equal. Combined they
come to about 38% of GDP. Fiscal policy has been very disciplined since
the 1998 debt crisis. The overall budget surplus for 2001 was 2.4% of
GDP, allowing for the first time in history for the next year's budget
to be calculated with a surplus (1.63% of GDP). Much of this growth,
which exceeded most expectations for the third consecutive year, was
driven by consumption demand. Analysts remain skeptical that high rates
of economic growth will continue, particularly since Russia's planned
budgets through 2005 assume that oil prices will steadily increase. Low
oil prices would mean that the Russian economy would not achieve its
projected growth. However, high oil prices also would have negative
economic effects, as they would cause the ruble to continue to
appreciate and make Russian exports less competitive. The 2007 budget
law incorporates a 25% increase in spending, much of it for
public-sector salary increases, pension increases and social work.
Spending on education is targeted to increase by 60%, based on 2006
legislation, and spending on healthcare is to increase by 30%. Funding
for the four "national projects", undertakings in agriculture,
education, housing and healthcare, will increase by 85 billion roubles
over the 2006 figure to 230 billion rubles.

### Public debt

#### Domestic

Before the 2008 global economic crisis, when the federal budget was in
surplus, annual government domestic debt issuance was a relatively small
figure at 170 – 250 billion roubles annually. Federal government bonds
(OFZ) were being issued for technical reasons (maintaining the
functioning of the market, building-up the government yield curve etc.),
rather than financial considerations. The situation changed in 2009 when
the federal budget turned to deficit, and 2010 saw another deficit.
Although the year 2011 ended with a small surplus, the government
expects the budget to be in the red from 2012 till at least 2014. In
2009 and 2010 government bond issues amounted to 401 and 716 billion
rubles, respectively. In the first half of 2011, bonds worth 600 billion
rubles were issued, with an average maturity of five years.

Natural resources
-----------------

The mineral-packed Ural Mountains and the vast oil, gas, coal, and
timber reserves of Siberia and the Russian Far East make Russia rich in
natural resources, which dominate Russian exports. Oil and gas exports,
specifically, continue to be the main source of hard currency.

The petroleum industry in Russia is one of the largest in the world.
Russia has the largest reserves, and is the largest exporter, of natural
gas. It has the second largest coal reserves, the eighth largest oil
reserves, and is the largest exporter of oil in the world in absolute
numbers. Per capita oil production in Russia, though, is not that high.
As of 2007, Russia was producing 69.603 bbl/day per 1,000 people, much
less than Canada (102.575 bbl/day), Saudi Arabia (371.363 bbl/day), or
Norway (554.244 bbl/day), but more than two times the USA (28.083
bbl/day) or the UK (27.807 bbl/day).

Russia is also a leading producer and exporter of minerals and gold.
Ninety percent of Russian exports to the United States are minerals or
other raw materials. Russia is the largest diamond-producing nation in
the world, estimated to produce over 33 million carats in 2013, or 25%
of global output valued at over \$3.4 billion, with state-owned ALROSA
accounting for approximately 95% of all Russian production.

Expecting the area to become more accessible as climate change melts
Arctic ice, and believing the area contains large reserves of untapped
oil and natural gas, Russian explorers on 2 August 2007 in submersibles
planted the Russian flag on the Arctic seabed, staking a claim to energy
sources right up to the North Pole. Reaction to the event was mixed:
President Vladimir Putin congratulated the explorers for "the
outstanding scientific project", while Canadian officials stated the
expedition was just a public show.

Under the Federal Law "*On Continental Shelf Development*" upon proposal
from the federal agency managing the state fund of mineral resources, or
its territorial offices, the Russian government approves the list of
some sections of the mineral resources that are passed for development
without any contests and auctions, some sections of federal importance
of the Russian continental shelf, some sections of the mineral resources
of federal importance that are situated in Russia and stretch out on its
continental shelf, some gas deposits of federal importance that are
handed over for prospecting and developing mineral resources under a
joint license. The Russian government is also empowered to decide on the
handover of the previously mentioned sections of the mineral resources
for development without any contests and auctions.

The Russian fishing industry is the world's fourth-largest, behind
Japan, the United States, and China.

Russia has more than a fifth of the world's forests, which makes it the
largest forest country in the world. However, according to a 2012 study
by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
government of the Russian Federation, the considerable potential of
Russian forests is underutilized and Russia's share of the global trade
in forest products is less than four percent.

Sectors
-------

### Industrial sector

Industrial Production in Russia decreased 2.10 percent in February 2013
over the same month in the previous year. Industrial Production in
Russia is reported by the Federal State Statistics Service.
Historically, from 2006 until 2013, Russia Industrial Production
averaged 2.82 Percent reaching an all-time high of 12.60 Percent in May
2010 and a record low of -16.90 Percent in January 2009. In Russia,
industrial production measures the output of businesses integrated in
industrial sector of the economy such as manufacturing, mining, and
utilities. Russia is one of the most industrialized of the former Soviet
republics. In the 2000s, Russia's industry, due to increasing demand and
improved state finances, emerged from a deep crisis caused by the
dissolution of the Soviet Union. However, years of low investment
continue to leave their mark on the industry's capabilities and a lot of
its equipment is in need of modernization.

Besides its resource-based industries, Russia has developed large
manufacturing capacities, notably in machinery. The defense and aircraft
industries are important employers and are able to offer internationally
competitive products for export.

#### Defense industry

Russia's defense industry employs 2.53 million people, accounting for
20% of all manufacturing jobs. Russia is the world's second largest
conventional arms exporter after the United States. The most popular
types of weaponry bought from Russia are Sukhoi and MiG fighters, air
defense systems, helicopters, battle tanks, armored personnel carriers
and infantry fighting vehicles. The research organization Centre for
Analysis of Strategies and Technologies ranked the air defense system
producer Almaz-Antey as the industry's most successful company in 2007,
followed by aircraft-maker Sukhoi. Almaz-Antey's revenue that year was
\$3.122 billion, and it had a work force of 81,857 people.

#### Aircraft industry

Aircraft manufacturing is an important industry sector in Russia,
employing around 355,300 people. The Russian aircraft industry offers a
portfolio of internationally competitive military aircraft such as
MiG-29 and Su-30, while new projects such as the Sukhoi Superjet 100 are
hoped to revive the fortunes of the civilian aircraft segment. In 2009,
companies belonging to the United Aircraft Corporation delivered 95 new
fixed-wing aircraft to its customers, including 15 civilian models. In
addition, the industry produced over 141 helicopters. It is one of the
most science-intensive hi-tech sectors and employs the largest number of
skilled personnel. The production and value of the military aircraft
branch far outstrips other defense industry sectors, and aircraft
products make up more than half of the country's arms exports.

#### Space industry

Space industry of Russia consists of over 100 companies and employs
250,000 people. The largest company of the industry is RKK Energia, the
main manned space flight contractor. Leading launch vehicle producers
are Khrunichev and TsSKB Progress. Largest satellite developer is
Reshetnev Information Satellite Systems, while NPO Lavochkin is the main
developer of interplanetary probes.

#### Automotive industry

Automobile production is a significant industry in Russia, directly
employing around 600,000 people or 0,7% of the country's total work
force. In addition, the industry supports around 2–3 million people in
related industries. Russia was the world's 15th largest car producer in
2010, and accounts for about 7% of the worldwide production. In 2009 the
industry produced 595,807 light vehicles, down from 1,469,898 in 2008
due to the global financial crisis. The largest companies are light
vehicle producers AvtoVAZ and GAZ, while KAMAZ is the leading heavy
vehicle producer. 11 foreign carmakers have production operations or are
constructing plants in Russia.

#### Railroad industry

Russian Railways accounts for 2.5% of Russia's GDP. The percentage of
freight and passenger traffic that goes by rail is unknown, since no
statistics are available for private transportation such as private
automobiles or company-owned trucks. In 2007, about 1.3 billion
passengers and 1.3 billion tons of freight went via Russian Railways. In
2007 the company owned 19,700 goods and passenger locomotives, 24,200
passenger cars (carriages) (2007) and 526,900 freight cars (goods
wagons) (2007). A further 270,000 freight cars in Russia are privately
owned (needs source). In 2009 Russia had 128,000 kilometers of
common-carrier railroad line, of which about half is electrified and
carries most of the traffic, over 40% was double track or better.

#### Electronics

Russia is experiencing a regrowth of Microelectronics, with the revival
of JCS Mikron. An example of a successful Russian consumer electronics
company is Telesystems, whose products are sold in over 20 countries.

### Telecommunications

Russia's telecommunications industry is growing in size and maturity. As
of 31 December 2007, there were an estimated 4,900,000 broadband lines
in Russia. Over 72% of the broadband lines were via cable modems and the
rest via DSL.

In 2006, there were more than 300 BWA operator networks, accounting for
5% of market share, with dial-up accounting for 30%, and Broadband Fixed
Access accounting for the remaining 65%. In December 2006, Tom Phillips,
chief government and regulatory affairs officer of the GSM Association
stated:

:   
    :   "Russia has already achieved more than 100% mobile penetration
        thanks to the huge popularity of wireless communications among
        Russians and the government's good work in fostering a market
        driven mobile sector based on strong competition."

The financial crisis, which had already hit the country at the end of
2008, caused a sharp reduction of the investments by the business
sectors and a notable reduction of IT budget made by government in
2008–2009. As a consequence, in 2009 the IT market in Russia declined by
more than 20% in ruble terms and by one third in euro terms. Among the
particular segments, the biggest share of the Russian IT market still
belongs to hardware.

### Agriculture

Russia comprises roughly three-quarters of the territory of the former
Soviet Union. Following the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991 and
after nearly 10 years of decline, Russian agriculture began to show
signs of improvement due to organizational and technological
modernization. Northern areas concentrate mainly on livestock, and the
southern parts and western Siberia produce grain. The restructuring of
former state farms has been an extremely slow process. The new land code
passed by the Duma in 2002 should speed restructuring and attract new
domestic investment to Russian agriculture. Private farms and garden
plots of individuals account for over one-half of all agricultural
production.

### Insurance

According to the Central Bank of Russia 422 insurance companies operate
on the Russian insurance market by the end of 2013. The concentration of
insurance business is significant across all major segments except
:ru:Обязательное страхование гражданской ответственности владельцев
транспортных средств|compulsory motor third party liability market
(CMTPL), as the Top 10 companies in 2013 charged 58.1% premiums in total
without compulsory health insurance (CHI). Russian insurance market in
2013 demonstrated quite significant rate of growth in operations. Total
amount of premiums charged (without CHI) in 2013 is RUB 904.9 bln
(increase on 11.8% compared to 2012), total amount of claims paid is RUB
420.8 bln (increase on 13.9% compared to 2012). Premiums to GDP ratio
(total without CHI) in 2013 increased to 1.36% compared to 1.31 a year
before. The share of premiums in household spending increased to 1.39%.
Level of claims paid on the market total without CHI is 46.5%,
insufficient increase compared to 2012. The number of polices in 2013
increased on 0.1% compared to 2012, to 139.6 mln policies . Although
relative indicators of the Russian insurance market returned to
pre-crisis levels, the progress is achieved mainly by the increase of
life insurance and accident insurance, the input of these two market
segments in premium growth in 2013 largely exceeds their share on the
market. As before, life insurance and accident insurance are often used
by banks as an appendix to a credit contract protecting creditors from
the risk of credit default in case of borrower’s death or disability.
The rise of these lines is connected, evidently, with the increase in
consumer loans, as the total sum of credit obligations of population in
2013 increased on 28% to RUB 9.9 trillion. At the same time premium to
GDP ratio net of life and accident insurance remained at the same level
of 1.1% as in 2012. Thus, if “banking” lines of business are excluded,
Russian insurance market is in stagnation stage for the last four years,
as premiums to GDP ratio net of life and accident insurance remains at
the same level of 1.1% since 2010.

### Trade

Russia recorded a trade surplus of 17742 USD Million in January 2013.
Balance of Trade in Russia is reported by the Central Bank of Russia.
Historically, from 1997 until 2013, Russia Balance of Trade averaged
8338.23 USD Million reaching an all-time high of 20647 USD Million in
December 2011 and a record low of -185 USD Million in February 1998.
Russia runs regular trade surpluses primarily due to exports of
commodities. Russia main exports are oil and natural gas (58 percent of
total exports), nickel, palladium, iron and chemical products. Others
include: cars, military equipment and timber. Russia imports food,
ground transports, pharmaceuticals and textile and footwear. Main
trading partners are: China (7 percent of total exports and 10 percent
of imports), Germany (7 percent of exports and 8 percent of imports) and
Italy. This page includes a chart with historical data for Russia
Balance of Trade.Exports in Russia decreased to 39038 USD Million in
January 2013 from 48568 USD Million in December 2012. Exports in Russia
is reported by the Central Bank of Russia. Historically, from 1994 until
2013, Russia Exports averaged 18668.83 USD Million reaching an all-time
high of 51338 USD Million in December 2011 and a record low of 4087 USD
Million in January 1994. Russia is the fifth largest economy in the
world and is a leading exporter of oil and natural gas. In Russia,
services are the biggest sector of the economy and account for 58
percent of GDP. Within services the most important segments are:
wholesale and retail trade, repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles and
personal and household goods (17 percent of total GDP); public
administration, health and education (12 percent); real estate (9
percent) and transport storage and communications (7 percent). Industry
contributes 40 percent to total output. Mining (11 percent of GDP),
manufacturing (13 percent) and construction (4 percent) are the most
important industry segments. Agriculture accounts for the remaining 2
percent. This page includes a chart with historical data for Russia
Exports.Imports in Russia decreased to 21296 USD Million in January 2013
from 31436 USD Million in December 2012. Imports in Russia is reported
by the Central Bank of Russia. Historically, from 1994 until 2013,
Russia Imports averaged 11392.06 USD Million reaching an all-time high
of 31553 USD Million in October 2012 and a record low of 2691 USD
Million in January 1999. Russia main imports are food (13 percent of
total imports) and ground transports (12 percent). Others include:
pharmaceuticals, textile and footwear, plastics and optical instruments.
Main import partners are China (10 percent of total imports) and Germany
(8 percent). Others include: Italy, France, Japan and United States.
This page includes a chart with historical data for Russia Imports. In
1999, exports were up slightly, while imports slumped by 30.5%. As a
consequence, the trade surplus ballooned to \$33.2 billion, more than
double the previous year's level. In 2001, the trend shifted, as exports
declined while imports increased. World prices continue to have a major
effect on export performance, since commodities, particularly oil,
natural gas, metal, and the timber comprise 80% of Russian exports.
Ferrous metals exports suffered the most in 2001, declining by 7.5%. On
the import side, steel and grains dropped by 11% and 61%, respectively.

Most analysts predicted that these trade trends would continue to some
extent in 2002. In the first quarter of 2002, import expenditures were
up 12%, increased by goods and a rapid rise of travel expenditure. The
combination of import duties, a 20% value-added tax and excise taxes on
imported goods (especially automobiles, alcoholic beverages, and
aircraft) and an import licensing regime for alcohol still restrain
demand for imports. Frequent and unpredictable changes in customs
regulations also have created problems for foreign and domestic traders
and investors. In March 2002, Russia placed a ban on poultry from the
United States. In the first quarter of 2002, exports were down 10% as
falling income from goods exports was partly compensated for by rising
services exports, a trend since 2000. The trade surplus decreased to
\$7 billion from well over \$11 billion the same period last year.

Foreign trade rose 34% to \$151.5 billion in the first half of 2005,
mainly due to the increase in oil and gas prices which now form 64% of
all exports by value. Trade with CIS countries is up 13.2% to
\$23.3 billion. Trade with the EU forms 52.9%, with the CIS 15.4%,
Eurasian Economic Community 7.8% and Asia-Pacific Economic Community
15.9%.

Trade volume between China and Russia reached \$29.1 billion in 2005, an
increase of 37.1% compared with 2004. China’s export of machinery and
electronic goods to Russia grew 70%, which is 24% of China’s total
export to Russia in the first 11 months of 2005. During the same time,
China’s export of high-tech products to Russia increased by 58%, and
that is 7% of China’s total exports to Russia. Also in this time period
border trade between the two countries reached \$5.13 billion, growing
35% and accounting for nearly 20% of the total trade. Most of China’s
exports to Russia remain apparel and footwear.

Russia is China’s eighth largest trade partner and China is now Russia’s
fourth largest trade partner.

China now has over 750 investment projects in Russia, involving
\$1.05 billion. China’s contracted investment in Russia totaled
\$368 million during January–September 2005, twice that in 2004.

Chinese imports from Russia are mainly those of energy sources, such as
crude oil, which is mostly transported by rail, and electricity exports
from neighboring Siberian and Far Eastern regions. Exports of both of
these commodities are increasing, as Russia opened the Eastern
Siberia–Pacific Ocean oil pipeline's branch to China, and Russian power
companies are building some of its hydropower stations with a view of
future exports to China. Despite all this Russia still exports more to
China by amount of 21.23 billion US dollars in comparison to an import
of 17.52 Billions in 2009.

### Information technology

The IT market is one of the most dynamic sectors of the Russian economy.
Russian software exports have risen from just \$120 million in 2000 to
\$3.3 billion in 2010. Since the year 2000 the IT market has started
growth rates of 30–40 percent a year, growing by 54% in 2006 alone. The
biggest sector in terms of revenue is system and network integration,
which accounts for 28.3% of the total market revenues. Meanwhile the
fastest growing segment of the IT market is offshore programming.

Currently Russia controls 3% of the offshore software development market
and is the third leading country (after India and China) among software
exporters. Such growth of software outsourcing in Russia is caused by a
number of factors. One of them is the supporting role of the Russian
Government. The government has launched a program promoting construction
of IT-oriented technology parks (Technoparks) – special zones that have
an established infrastructure and enjoy a favorable tax and customs
regime, in seven different places around the country: Moscow,
Novosibirsk, Nizhny Novgorod, Kaluga, Tumen, Republic of Tatarstan and
St. Peterburg Regions. Another factor stimulating the IT sector growth
in Russia is the presence of global technology corporations such as
Intel, Google, Motorola, Sun Microsystems, Boeing, Nortel,
Hewlett-Packard, SAP AG, and others, which have intensified their
software development activities and opened their R&D centers in Russia.

Under a government decree signed On June 2013, a special "roadmap" is
expected to ease business suppliers’ access to the procurement programs
of state-owned infrastructure monopolies, including such large ones as
Gazprom, Rosneft, Russian Railways, Rosatom, and Transneft. These
companies will be expected to increase the proportion of domestic
technology solutions they use in their operations. The decree puts
special emphasis on purchases of innovation products and technologies.
According to the new decree, by 2015, government-connected companies
must double their purchases of Russian technology solutions compared to
the 2013 level and their purchasing levels must quadruple by 2018.

### Nanotechnology

In its push to diversify Russia's research and development in emerging
technologies, The Putin government has announced a massive \$7 billion
investment program in nanotechnology. As part of the program, during
2007, \$5 billion is being invested into a new state corporation,
Rosnanotech, that will be responsible for overseeing and coordinating
research in the area.

In criticism of the initiative, it has been noted that the Russian
nanotech program will receive three times more state funding than the
rest of Russia's scientists put together.

Apart from public funding, Mikhail Prokhorov, a leading Russian metals
and banking tycoon, has announced the creation of a \$17.5 billion
holding company that will focus on high-tech investments, including
alternative energy and nanotechnology.

### Transportation

### Construction market

In 2009 the Russian construction industry survived its most difficult
year in more than a decade. The 0.8% reduction recorded by the industry
for the first three quarters of 2010 looked remarkably healthy in
comparison with the 18.4% slump recorded the previous year, and
construction firms became much more optimistic about the future than in
previous months. The most successful construction firms concluded
contracts worth billions of dollars an planned to take on employees and
purchase new building machinery. The downturn served to emphasise the
importance of the government to the construction market.

### Retail

As of 2013, Russians spent 60% of their pre-tax income shopping, the
highest percentage in Europe. This is possible because many Russians pay
no rent or house payments, owning their own home after privatization of
state-owned Soviet housing. Shopping malls were popular with
international investors and shoppers from the emerging middle class. 82
malls had been built near major cities including a few that were very
large. A supermarket selling groceries is a typical anchor store in a
Russian mall.

Investment
----------

In 1999, investment increased by 4.5%, the first such growth since 1990.
Investment growth has continued at high rates from a very low base, with
an almost 30% increase in total foreign investments in 2001 compared to
the previous year. Higher retained earnings, increased cash
transactions, the positive outlook for sales, and political stability
have contributed to these favorable trends. Foreign investment in Russia
is very low. Cumulative investment from U.S. sources of about
\$4 billion are about the same as U.S. investment in Costa Rica. Over
the medium-to-long term, Russian companies that do not invest to
increase their competitiveness will find it harder either to expand
exports or protect their recent domestic market gains from higher
quality imports.

Foreign direct investment, which includes contributions to starting
capital and credits extended by foreign co-owners of enterprises, rose
slightly in 1999 and 2000, but decreased in 2001 by about 10%. Foreign
portfolio investment, which includes shares and securities, decreased
dramatically in 1999, but has experienced significant growth since then.
In 2001, foreign portfolio investment was \$451 million, more than twice
the amount from the previous year. Inward foreign investment during the
1990s was dwarfed by Russian capital flight, estimated at about
\$15 billion annually. During the years of recovery following the 1998
debt crisis, capital flight seems to have slowed. Inward investment from
Cyprus and Gibraltar, two important channels for capital flight from
Russia in recent years, suggest that some Russian money is returning
home.

A significant drawback for investment is the banking sector, which lacks
the resources, the capability, and the trust of the population that it
would need to attract substantial savings and direct it toward
productive investments. Russia's banks contribute only about 3% of
overall investment in Russia. While ruble lending has increased since
the August 1998 financial crisis, loans are still only 40% of total bank
assets. The Central Bank of Russia reduced its refinancing rate five
times in 2000, from 55% to 25%, signaling its interest in lower lending
rates. Interest on deposits and loans are often below the inflation
rate. The poorly developed banking system makes it difficult for
entrepreneurs to raise capital and to diversify risk. Banks still
perceive commercial lending as risky, and some banks are inexperienced
with assessing credit risk.

Money on deposit with Russian banks represents only 7% of GDP. Sberbank
receives preferential treatment from the state and holds 73% of all bank
deposits. In March 2002, Sergei Ignatyev replaced Viktor Gerashchenko as
Chairman of the Russian Central Bank. Under his leadership, necessary
banking reforms, including stricter accounting procedures and federal
deposit insurance, were implemented.

### Strategic sectors and enterprises

In the Russian law, there are sectors of the economy which are
considered to be crucial for national security and foreign companies are
restricted from owning them. Investments in the so-called Strategic
Sectors are defined in a law adopted by the Federal Assembly of Russia.
Strategic enterprises are a list of state owned corporations which
privatization and new share issues of require explicit approval of the
President. It began with a Presidential Decree with list of more than
1000 state owned firms dated from 2004, which was amended several times.

### Mergers and acquisitions

From 1993 to 2010, Russian companies have been involved as either an
acquirer or acquired company in 13,834 mergers and acquisitions with a
total known value of 613 bil. USD. The number of deals that happened in
2010 have been 3,662, which is a new record; compared to 2009 this was
an increase of 12%. The value of deals in 2010 was US\$100 billion,
which was the second highest number ever; compared to 2009 this was an
increase of 143%.

Sanctions
---------

On March 2014, amidst the 2014 Crimean crisis, following the passage of
a secession referendum, the declaration of independence of the Republic
of Crimea from Ukraine and the process of accession to Russia that
followed it, U.S President Barack Obama announced he had signed a new
executive order that would allow him to target specific sectors of the
Russian economy. On March 20, 2014, the Department of Treasury's Office
of Foreign Assets Control added Rossiya Bank to the Specially Designated
Individuals list as part of sanctions taken in response to the 2014
Crimean crisis, placing restrictions on US trade with the bank.
International payment systems Visa Inc. and MasterCard suddenly stopped
service of credit cards issued by the Rossiya Bank. Non-cash
transactions of SMP Bank (owned by Rottenberg brothers) and Sobinbank
(100% subsidiary of Rossiya) were also frozen.

Statistics
----------

**Retail sales in Russia**

  **Year**                          2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007
  --------------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ -------
  **Total retail sales (RUB tr)**   3.77   4.53   5.64   7.04   8.69   10.76

**Key data on the telecommunications market in Russia**

  **Year**                                        2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009
  ----------------------------------------------- ------ ------ ------ ------ ------ -------
  **Telecommunications market value (€ bn)**      12.9   16.0   20.9   25.0   28.0   24.2
  **Telecommunications market growth rate (%)**   32.0   23.5   30.6   20.2   11.5   −13.4

**Exchange rates**

  **Year**      2008    2009    2010
  ------------- ------- ------- -------
  **EUR/RUR**   41.44   43.39   40.33
  **USD/RUR**   29.38   30.24   30.48

Types of legal entities in Russia
---------------------------------

-   IP (Индивидуальный предприниматель) – Russian "Individual
    entrepreneur"
-   OOO (Общество с ограниченной ответственностью, ООО) – Russian
    "Limited liability company"

LLC is set up by one or several persons (legal entities and/or
individuals), its charter capital is divided into participatory shares,
and LLC participants are not liable for company’s obligations and bear
the risk of losses to the extent of the contributions made by them. The
number of shareholders may not exceed 50.

-   ZAO (Закрытое акционерное общество, ЗАО) – Russian "Private
    joint-stock company"

In a PJSC shares are distributed only among its founders or another
predetermined group of persons. A closed company has the right to
conduct a closed subscription to its shares, while the shareholders of a
closed company have a pre-emptive right to purchase shares sold by other
company shareholders. The number of company’s shareholders should not
exceed 50.

-   OAO (Открытое акционерное общество, ОАО) – Russian "Public
    joint-stock company"

An open company has the right to conduct open subscription to its shares
- among an unlimited group of persons and closed subscription (a limited
predetermined group of persons), if the opportunity to conduct a closed
subscription is not limited by company’s charter or legal acts.
Shareholders do not have a pre-emptive right to purchase shares sold by
other shareholders of the company. The number of shareholders is
unlimited.

-   ANO (Автономная некоммерческая организация, АНО) – Russian
    "Autonomous non-profit organization"
-   GP or GUP (Государственное унитарное предприятие, ГП or ГУП) –
    Russian "Unitary state enterprise"
-   Фонд – Russian "Fund"
-   PK (Производственный кооператив, ПK) – Russian "Production
    Cooperative"
-   PP (Политические партии, ПП) – Russian "Political party"

