The **Era of Stagnation** (also called the **Period of Stagnation**,
**Stagnation Period**, **Stagnation Era**, the **Brezhnevian
Stagnation**, or the **Brezhnev Stagnation**) was a period of economic,
political, and social stagnation in the Soviet Union, which began during
the rule of Leonid Brezhnev (1964–1982) and continued under Yuri
Andropov (1982–1984) and Konstantin Chernenko (1984–1985). This period
ended when Mikhail Gorbachev, who succeeded Chernenko, introduced his
policies of *glasnost*, *perestroika*, *uskoreniye*, and
*demokratizatsiya*, leading to the Revolutions of 1989 and the
dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.

Historians, scholars, and specialists are uncertain what caused the
stagnation, with some arguing that the planned economy was doomed to
failure from the very beginning. Others have argued that the lack of
reform, or the high expenditures on defence, led to stagnation. The
majority of scholars set the starting year for economic stagnation
either at 1973 or 1975, although some claim that it began as early as
the 1960s. Social stagnation began much earlier, with Brezhnev's rise to
power, his revoking of several of the relatively liberal reforms of his
predecessor, Nikita Khrushchev, and partial rehabilitation of Stalinist
policies. The social stagnation can therefore be traced to the
Sinyavsky–Daniel trial in 1965. Politically, the stagnation began with
the establishment of a gerontocracy, which came into being as part of
the policy of stability.

Brezhnev has been criticised posthumously for doing too little to
improve the economic situation. Throughout his rule, no major reforms
were initiated and the few proposed reforms were either very modest or
opposed by the majority of the Soviet leadership. The reform-minded
Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Government), Alexei Kosygin,
introduced two modest reforms in the 1970s after the failure of his more
radical 1965 reform, and attempted to reverse the trend of declining
growth. By the 1970s, Brezhnev had consolidated enough power to stop any
"radical" reform-minded attempts by Kosygin.

When Brezhnev died in November 1982, the Soviet Union he handed over to
his successor, Andropov, was much less dynamic than when he assumed
power. During his short rule, Andropov introduced modest reforms; he
died little more than a year later in February 1984. Chernenko, his
successor, continued much of Andropov's policies; whether those policies
improved the economic situation in the country is still debated amongst
scholars.

Terminology
-----------

The term "Era of Stagnation" was coined by Mikhail Gorbachev to describe
the economic difficulties that developed when Leonid Brezhnev ruled the
Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982 although scholars disagree on when the
stagnation started and the causes (see Analyses section). Gorbachevians
have criticised Brezhnev, and Brezhnevism in general, for being too
conservative and failing to change with the times. Gorbachev once
referred to Brezhnev's rule as "the lowest stage of socialism".

The economic problems that began under Brezhnev persisted into the short
administrations of Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko both of whom
instituted reform policies but whether the economic situation improved
as a result is disputed. The Era of Stagnation ended with Gorbachev's
rise to power during which political and social life was democratised
even though the economy was still stagnating. The social stagnation may
have started with the Sinyavsky–Daniel trial, which marked the end of
Nikita Khrushchev's Khrushchev Thaw|"Thaw" or, as considered by some,
with the later suppression of the Prague Spring in 1968.

Brezhnev himself declared the era as the period of Developed Socialism
in 1971 at the 24th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
The term "Developed Socialism" stems from Khrushchev's promise of
reaching communism in 20 years. There are several people who consider
this the best era in Soviet history in which the standard of living
improved as a result of stable social security and low levels of social
inequality.

Economy
-------

### Analyses

Robert Service, author of the *History of Modern Russia: From Tsarism to
the Twenty-first Century*, claims that with mounting economic problems
worker discipline decreased, which the Government could not counter
effectively because of the full employment policy. According to Service,
this policy led to government industries, such as factories, mines and
offices, being staffed by undisciplined and unproductive personnel
ultimately leading to a "work-shy workforce" among Soviet workers and
administrators. While the Soviet Union under Brezhnev had the "second
greatest industrial capacity" after the United States, and produced more
"steel, oil, pig-iron, cement and [...] tractors" than any other country
in the world. Service treats the problems of agriculture during the
Breznhev era as proof of the need for "de-collectivisation". In short,
Service considers the Soviet economy to have become "static" during this
time period, and Brezhnev's policy of stability was a "recipe for
political disaster".

Richard Sakwa, author of the book *The Rise and Fall of the Soviet
Union: 1917–1991*, takes a dimmer view of the Brezhnev era by claiming
that growth rates fell "inexorably" from the 1950s until they stopped
completely in the 1980s. His reasoning for this stagnation was the
growing demand for unskilled workers resulted in a decline of
productivity and labour discipline. Sakwa believes that stability itself
led to stagnation and claimed that without strong leadership "Soviet
socialism had a tendency to relapse into stagnation."

According to Edwin Bacon and Mark Sandle, authors of *Brezhnev
Reconsidered*, the economy under Brezhnev was as dynamic as the economy
presided over by Nikita Khrushchev, but this dynamism had stalled by the
time Yuri Andropov, and subsequently Konstantin Chernenko, became
General Secretary. Mark Harrison claims that the economic performance of
the Brezhnev era has not been looked at objectively as analysis of the
period sometimes used lower estimates. Harrison further claims that in
the period between 1928 and 1973 the Soviet economy grew in a phase that
would surpass the United States "one day". During the international oil
crisis, growth in the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc halted abruptly
and stalled for a longer period than in the West causing the economy to
begin stagnating. One explanation, according to Harrison, is that the
Soviet economy could not sustain its extensive growth patterns. Other
explanations include: the lack of Soviet, and communist bloc,
transparency with other nations hindering globalisation and
misinterpretation of a "permanent" post–World War II economic boom
leading to faulty economic decisions. He claims that the economic
policies of Andropov, and Chernenko, had improved the economic situation
in the country and Mikhail Gorbachev inherited a more dynamic and
vibrant economy in a "pre-crisis situation" where the economy was still
growing with low internal and external debts, compared to the economy
that Andropov and Chernenko inherited.

Archie Brown, author of *The Rise and Fall of Communism*, claims in his
book that the term Era of Stagnation "was in many ways a fitting
description, for this was a period of declining growth", but noted it
could be misleading in non-economic spheres. Brown admits to high growth
rates in the mid-to-late 1960s (during the Eighth Five-Year Plan)
claiming that the Soviet economy "enjoyed stronger growth in the second
half of the 1960s than it ever did thereafter". The link between these
growth rates and the Kosygin reform is, according to Brown, "tenuous",
but says that "From the point of view of communist rulers, the Brezhnev
era was in many ways successful". While the Soviet Union was in no way
an economic power, its natural resources provided a strong economic
foundation, which bore fruit during the 1973 oil crisis and "turned out
to be an energy bonanza". On the other hand, Brown states it was a sign
of weakness that the Soviet Union grew so dependent on her natural
resources, as she did in the 1970s.

Philip Hanson, author of *The Rise and Fall of the Soviet economy: an
Economic History of the USSR from 1945*, claims that the label
stagnation is not "entirely unfair". Brezhnev, according to Hanson, did
preside over a period of slowdown in economic growth, but claims that
the era started with good growth that was at a higher rate than during
the end of Khrushchev's rule. Economic slowdown began in 1973 "when even
the official estimates began to show Soviet per capita production no
longer closing the gap with the US." Before 1973, there was a reform
period launched by Alexei Kosygin, which many believed would become as
radical as those in the Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia and the
previous reform attempts in Hungary. According to Hanson, many assumed
that growth during the Brezhnev era did not stop but started to
stagnate. However, not everything stagnated as per capita consumption
grew by 1.9% during the 1970s, which is a "highly respectable rate" of
growth. Another point which Hanson makes is that, in contrast to the
repressive policies of Joseph Stalin and instability-inducing policies
of Khrushchev, the Brezhnev era was stable and a "period of
(comparative) plenty".

Robert Vincent Daniels in his book, *Russia's Transformation: Snapshots
of a Crumbling System*, claimed that the hallmark of the Brezhnev era
was the *status quo*, which in turn led to the development of a great
*paradox*; "the contradictions of what it was and what it could be
became obvious". Net growth, in excess of 50% and as high as two thirds,
was primarily in the urban sector resulting in high population growth
and urban growth higher than that of the United States. Industrial
development continued to grow rapidly, and in certain sectors surpassed
the United States. As an example, coal production in the Soviet Union
increased from 85 million metric tons in 1964 to 149 million metric tons
in 1981 while in the United States it grew from 100 million to 130
million metric tons in the same period. The Soviet Union became the
largest exporter of petroleum in the world and by the end of the Tenth
Five-Year Plan (1976–1981) the Soviet GNP "reached about 60% of the
American level, and the net current investment was actually greater in
absolute terms". The failure then, according to Daniels, was that the
Soviet economy was not able to deliver in certain sectors; agriculture
is a sector where this failure occurred. Throughout Soviet history,
deficiencies in agriculture and consumer goods always existed. During
Brezhnev's reign, the Soviet Union became the largest producer of wheat
in the world but was unable to produce meat in sufficient quantities.
According to Daniels, the economy began to stagnate in 1975 rather than
1973 and that the following period contradicted the previous one "in
almost every way".

### Causes

One of the suggested causes of stagnation was the increased military
expenditure over consumer goods and other economic spheres. Andrei
Sakharov, the veteran dissident, claimed in a 1980 letter to Brezhnev
that the increasing expenditure on the armed forces was stalling
economic growth. However, David Michael Kotz and Fred Weir, authors of
*Revolution from Above: The Demise of the Soviet System*, argue that
militarisation cannot be the prime cause for the economic stagnation, as
military spending had historically been high (17% of GNP in 1950) and
had increased on par with economic growth without previously
destabilising the economy.

During the 1973 oil crisis, economic growth in the rest of the world
plummeted but the Soviet hard currency earnings grew as a result of oil
exports. Following the crisis, overall economic activity decreased
markedly in the Soviet Union, the Western Bloc and Japan, but in the
Soviet Union it was much more pronounced. Ultimately, economic
stagnation in the Soviet Union could only have been caused by internal
problems rather than external.

### Summary

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Period                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GNP\                    NMP\                       NMP\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <small>(according to\   <small>(according to\      <small>(according to\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       the CIA)</small>        Grigorii Khanin)</small>   the USSR)</small>
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- -------------------------- -----------------------
  1960–1965                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.8                     4.4                        6.5

  1965–1970                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.9                     4.1                        7.7

  1970–1975                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3.0                     3.2                        5.7

  1975–1980                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.9                     1.0                        4.2

  1980–1985                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.8                     0.6                        3.5

  align=left colspan=4|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                group=note}}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  <center>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             </center>
  {{\#tag:ref|Western specialists believe that that the net material product (NMP; Soviet version of gross national product (GNP)) contained distortions and could not accurately determine a country's economic growth; according to some, it greatly exaggerated growth. Because of this, several specialists created GNP figures to estimate Soviet growth rates and to compare Soviet growth rates with the growth rates of capitalist countries. Grigorii Khanin published his growth rates in the 1980s as a "translation" of NMP to GNP. His growth rates were (as seen above) much lower than the official figures, and lower than some Western estimates. His estimates was widely publicised by conservative think thanks as such as the Heritage Foundation. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Khanin's estimates led several agencies criticise the estimates made by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). Since then the CIA has often been accused over overestimating Soviet growth. In response to the criticism of CIA's work, a panel led by economist James R. Millar was established to check out if this was in fact true. The panel concluded that the CIA were based on facts, and that "Methodologically, Khanin's approach was is naive, and it has not been possible for others to reproduce his results. Michael Boretsky, a Department of Commerce economist, criticised the CIA estimates to be to low. He used the same CIA methodology to estimate West German and American growth rates. The results were 32% below the official GNP growth for West Germany, and 13 below the official GNP growth for the United States. In the end, the conclusion is the same, the Soviet Union grew rapidly economically until the mid-1970s, when a systematic crisis began.   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  :   Growth figures for the Soviet economy varies widely (as seen below if compared to those at the table above):                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Eighth Five-Year Plan (1966–1970)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  -   Gross national product (GNP): 5.2%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
  -   GNP: 5.3%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
  -   Gross national income (GNI): 7.1%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
  -   Capital investments in agriculture: 24%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  Ninth Five-Year Plan (1971–1975)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  -   GNP: 3.7%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
  -   GNI: 5.1%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
  -   Labour productivity: 6%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  -   Capital investments in agriculture: 27%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  Tenth Five-Year Plan (1976–1980)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  -   GNP: 2.7%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
  -   GNP: 3%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  -   Labour productivity: 3.2%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  Eleventh Five-Year Plan (1981–1985)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
  -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the main causes for Khrushchev's dismissal from power was the
relatively poor economic growth during the early 1960s. Overall economic
growth was 6% from 1951 to 1955 but had fallen to 5.8% in the subsequent
5 years and to 5% from 1961 to 1965. Labour productivity, which had
grown 4.7% from the 1950s to 1962, had declined to 4% by the early
1960s. Growth, capital out and investments were all showing signs of
steady decline. Another problem was Khrushchev's unrealistic promises
such as committing to reach communism in 20 years, a near impossibility
with the then-current economic indicators. Ultimately, as a result of
his failure to deliver on his promises and the problems engendered,
Khrushchev was dismissed in October 1964 by a collective leadership led
by Leonid Brezhnev and Alexei Kosygin. To counter Khrushchev's promise
of reaching communism, the Soviet leadership created the term Developed
socialism, which meant that the Soviet Union had developed to a
sufficiently advanced stage that the country would move "naturally" to
communism (in an unspecified amount of time).

Khrushchev's dismissal led to the establishment of a more conservative
Politburo; Kosygin, Nikolai Podgorny and Andrei Kirilenko were the most
liberal members, Brezhnev and Arvīds Pelše belonged to the moderate
faction while Mikhail Suslov retained his leadership of the party's
hardliners. Kosygin and Brezhnev strongly disagreed over economic
policy; Kosygin wanted to increase investments in consumer goods and
light industry whereas Brezhnev wanted to increase investment in heavy
industry, agriculture and defence. In 1965, Kosygin introduced an
economic reform, widely referred to as the 1965 Soviet economic
reform|"Kosygin reform", which aimed to reform the planned economy
within a socialist framework. In a bid to improve the Soviet economy
Kosygin copied some of the measures used in the Western Bloc, such as
profit making, which Brezhnev agreed to as the Soviet economy was
entering a period of low growth. Kosygin's reforms on agriculture gave
considerable autonomy to the collective farms, giving them the right to
the contents of private farming. As a result, during the Eighth
Five-Year Plan (1966–1970), large-scale land reclamation programmes,
construction of irrigation channels, and other measures, were enacted.
Overall, the reform failed and links to any high growth rates during the
Eighth Five-Year Plan are considered to be "tenuous".

The Brezhnev era, which had begun with high growth, began to stagnate
some time in the early-1970s. Kosygin's "radical" reform attempts were
halted in 1971 and his second reform was more modest. The second reform
was halted because of the 1973 oil crisis, when an international
increase in oil price prompted economic growth based on selling oil.
Another reform was implemented in 1979 but this, too, failed as by this
time the Soviet economy had become "addicted" to high oil prices.

In 1980, RIA Novosti reported that the Soviet Union showed the highest,
in Europe, and second highest, worldwide, industrial and agricultural
output. In 1960, the Soviet Union's industrial output was only 55% that
of America, but this increased to 80% by 1980. The 18 years of
Brezhnev's leadership of the Communist Party saw real incomes grow by
more than 1.5 times. More than 1.6 billion square meters of living space
was commissioned and provided to over 160 million people. At the same
time, the average rent for families did not exceed 3% of the family
income. Housing, health care, and education were affordable and
low-priced. As the circulation of the work force could not be balanced
by salaries, there was a lack of workers in some areas, largely in the
agricultural sector. This was partly solved by forcing older pupils,
students and in some cases even soldiers to work for some limited time
as agricultural workers (the practice has been informally called 'наряды
на картошку' (*naryady na kartoshku*, "assignments to potato fields")).

Opposition
----------

In fact, Soviet society became static. Post-Stalinist reforms initiated
under Nikita Khrushchev were discontinued. Not all the people accepted
the ideology of stagnation. Disloyalty was punished. Unauthorised
meetings and demonstrations were suppressed. Dissidents were routinely
arrested. Supporters of these meetings and demonstrations claimed that
the arrests were illegal, because there is no criminality in the
realization of the human right to obtain and distribute information.
They asserted this right was part of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948) and the final act of the Conference on Security and
Co-operation in Europe (1975).

Art and science
---------------

During the introduction of glasnost, many writers claimed that they did
not know about the repression of citizens who did not support the
Brezhnev stagnation. However, artists propagating "Soviet values" formed
a well paid, elite group that enjoyed an easy life and high social
status. The requirements for art (generalized under the name of
Socialist realism) were not as rude and straightforward as during
Stalinism.

Nevertheless, a noticeable part of prominent Soviet scientists and
artists (collectively known as Soviet dissidents|*dissidenty* ("the
dissidents")) continued both open and clandestine political opposition
to the regime which they began during the Khruschev rule. Prominent
nuclear physicist Andrey Sakharov and Soviet Army General Pyotr
Grigorenko are the best known representatives of this non-alienating,
but harshly oppressed movement.

Many other representatives of the Soviet intellectual elite
systematically criticized the social and moral manifestations of the
Stagnation without overtly challenging the authorities. Some notable
examples include writers Viktor Astafyev and Oles Honchar, playwright
Grigory Gorin, directors Eldar Ryazanov and Mark Zakharov.

Scientific fields such as genetics and computer science that were
officially forbidden during Stalinism were no longer repressed. Most of
the remaining pressure concentrated on the historical and social
sciences. However, history and social science material was usually
written in a theme that was in tune with Soviet ideology. In particular,
the departments of Scientific Communism and Scientific Atheism were
mandatory in many universities.

The overall level of science varied but in some cases was at the same
level with the rest of the world. For instance, Dubnium was discovered
by Soviet scientists at the Dubna research center. However, the science
level was not balanced between disciplines, with some topics, such as
advanced electronics, being researched much less than others, such as
nuclear physics.

Despite certain stagnation in economy and social life the Soviet Arts
and the Soviet sports were both flourishing during the Brezhnev's era.
The Soviet school of ballet was considered as one of the best in the
world. The Soviet Olympic teams frequently won 1st ranks at the Olympics
and lots of the films now regarded as the "Soviet classics" were made in
the "stagnation" period.

The stagnation effectively continued under Brezhnev's successors, Yuri
Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko, until *perestroika* was initiated by
Mikhail Gorbachev in 1986, where the state of the Soviet economy went
from stagnation to deterioration, which ultimately culminated in the
Dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
