The **February Revolution**  of 1917 was the first of two revolutions
in Russia in 1917. It was centered on Petrograd, then the capital (now
St. Petersburg), on Women's Day in March (late February in the Julian
calendar). The revolution, confined to the capital and its vicinity and
lasting less than a week, involved mass demonstrations and armed clashes
with police and gendarmes, the last loyal forces of the Russian
monarchy. In the last days mutinous Russian Army forces sided with the
revolutionaries. The immediate result of the revolution was the
abdication of Tsar Nicholas II, the end of the Romanov dynasty, and the
end of the Russian Empire. The Tsar was replaced by a Russian
Provisional Government under Prince Georgy Lvov. The Provisional
Government was an alliance between liberals and socialists who wanted
political reform. They set up a democratically-elected executive and
constituent assembly. At the same time, socialists also formed the
Petrograd Soviet, which ruled alongside the Provisional Government, an
arrangement termed Dual Power.

This revolution appeared to break out spontaneously, without any real
leadership or formal planning. Russia had been suffering from a number
of economic and social problems, which were compounded by the impact of
World War I. Bread rioters and industrial strikers were joined on the
streets by disaffected soldiers from the city's garrison. As more and
more troops deserted, and with loyal troops away at the Front, the city
fell into a state of chaos, leading to the overthrow of the Tsar.

The February Revolution was followed in the same year by the October
Revolution, bringing Bolshevik rule and a change in Russia's social
structure, and paving the way for the USSR.

Causes
------

A number of factors contributed to the downfall of the Tsarist regime in
the spring of 1917, both short and longer term. Different historians
apply different weights to each: liberal historians would emphasise the
turmoil created by the war, whereas other writers, particularly those
influenced by the materialist conception of history would place their
emphasis on the inevitability of change.

### Long-term causes

Despite its occurrence at the height of World War I, the roots of the
February Revolution go much further back in time. Chief among these was
Imperial Russia's failure, throughout the 19th and early 20th century,
to modernize its archaic social, economic and political structures
whilst maintaining the stability of ubiquitous devotion to an autocratic
monarch. As historian Richard Pipes writes, "the incompatibility of
capitalism and autocracy struck all who gave thought to the matter".

The first major event of the Russian Revolution was the February
Revolution, which was a chaotic affair, caused by the culmination of
over a century of civil and military unrest. The causes of this unrest
of the common people towards the Tsar and aristocratic landowners are
too many and complicated to neatly summarise, but key factors to
consider were ongoing resentment at the cruel treatment of peasants by
patricians, poor working conditions experienced by city workers in the
fledgling industrial economy and a growing sense of political and social
awareness of the lower orders in general (democratic ideas were reaching
Russia from the West and being touted by political activists).
Dissatisfaction of the proletarian lot was further compounded by food
shortages and military failures. In 1905 Russia experienced humiliating
losses in its war with Japan, then Bloody Sunday and the Revolution of
1905, Tsarist troops fired upon a peaceful, unarmed crowd—further
dividing Nicholas II from his people. Widespread strikes, riots and the
famous mutiny on the Battleship Potemkin ensued.

These conditions led to considerable agitation among the small working
and professional classes. This tension then erupted into general revolt
with the 1905 Revolution, and did so again under the strain of total war
in 1917, but this time with lasting consequences.

### Short-term causes

The revolution was provoked not only by Russian military failures during
the First World War, but also by public dissatisfaction with the way the
country was being run on the Home Front by Tsarina Alexandra Fyodorovna
of Hesse and Tsar Nicholas's ministers. The economic challenges Russia
faced fighting a total war also contributed.

In August 1914, all classes supported and virtually all political
deputies voted in favour of the war (despite calls from "defeatists",
including Lenin of the Bolshevik party, that it was not a war worth
fighting). The declaration of war was accompanied by a wave of jingoism
and flag-waving, which served to effect a temporary moratorium on
internal strife. After a few initial victories, such as in Galicia in
1915 and with the Brusilov Offensive in 1916, the Tsar's armies were
confronted with a number of very serious defeats. Nearly six million
casualties—dead, wounded and missing—had been accrued by January 1917.
Mutinies sprang up more often (most due to simple war weariness), morale
was at its lowest, and the (newly called up) officers and commanders
were at times very incompetent. Like all of the major armies, Russia's
armed forces suffered from inadequate supply. The pre-revolution
desertion rate ran at around 34,000 a month. Meanwhile, the wartime
alliance of industry, Duma and Stavka (Military High Command) started to
work outside of the Tsar's control.

In an attempt to boost morale and to repair his own reputation of being
a weak ruler, Nicholas announced in the summer of 1915 that he would
become the new Commander-in-Chief of the army, in defiance of almost
universal advice to the contrary. The result was disastrous on three
grounds. Firstly, it associated the monarchy with the unpopular war;
secondly, Nicholas proved a poor leader of men on the front line, often
irritating his own commanders with his interference; and thirdly, whilst
at the front, he was unavailable to govern. This left the reins of power
to his wife, the German Tsarina Alexandra, who was unpopular and accused
of being a spy and under the thumb of her confidant Grigori Rasputin,
himself so unpopular that he was assassinated by members of the nobility
in December 1916. The Tsarina proved an ineffective ruler in a time of
war, announcing a rapid succession of different Prime Ministers and
angering the Duma. The lack of strong leadership is illustrated by a
telegram from Octobrist politician Mikhail Rodzianko to the Tsar on, in
which Rodzianko begged for a minister with the "confidence of the
country" be instated immediately. Delay, he wrote, would be "tantamount
to death".

On the home front, a famine was looming and commodities were becoming
scarce as a result of problems with the overstretched railroad network.
Meanwhile, refugees from German-occupied Russia came in their millions.
The Russian economy, which had just seen one of the highest growth rates
in Europe, was blocked from the continent's markets by the war. Though
industry did not collapse, it was put under considerable strain and when
inflation soared, wages could not keep up. The Duma (lower house of
parliament), composed of liberal deputies, warned Tsar Nicholas II of
the impending danger and counselled him to form a new constitutional
government, like the one he had dissolved after some short-term attempts
in the aftermath of the 1905 Revolution. The Tsar ignored the Duma's
advice. Historian Edward Acton argues that "by stubbornly refusing to
reach any *modus vivendi* with the Progressive Bloc of the Duma...
Nicholas undermined the loyalty of even those closest to the throne
[and] opened an unbridgeable breach between himself and public opinion."
In short, the Tsar no longer had the support of the military, the
nobility or the Duma (collectively the *élites*), at the same time as
the legitimacy of the monarchy with the Russian people was at a low ebb.
The result was revolution.

Events
------

### Protests

At the beginning of February, Petrograd workers began several strikes
and demonstrations. On, workers at Putilov, Petrograd's largest
industrial plant, announced a strike. Although some clashes with the
Tsar's forces did occur, no one was injured on the opening day. The
strikers were fired, and some shops closed, resulting in further unrest
at other plants.

The next day, a series of meetings and rallies were held for
International Women's Day, which gradually turned into economic and
political gatherings. Demonstrations were organised to demand bread, and
these were supported by the industrial working force who considered them
a reason for continuing the strikes. The women workers marched to nearby
factories bringing out over 50,000 workers on strike. By, virtually
every industrial enterprise in Petrograd had been shut down, together
with many commercial and service enterprises. Students, white-collar
workers and teachers joined the workers in the streets and at public
meetings. In the streets, red banners appeared and the crowds chanted
slogans such as, "Down with the war!" "Down with the Tsar!" "Down with
the German woman!" "Down with Protopopov!"

To quell the riots, the Tsar looked to the army. At least 180,000 troops
were available in the capital, but most were either untrained or
injured. Historian Ian Beckett suggests around 12,000 could be regarded
as reliable, but even these proved reluctant to move in on the crowd,
since it included so many women. It was for this reason that when, on,
the Tsar ordered the army to suppress the rioting by force, troops began
to mutiny and join the protesters.

### Tsar's return and abdication

The Tsar had returned to his frontline base at Stavka on . After
violence erupted, however, Mikhail Rodzianko, Chairman of the Duma, sent
the Tsar a report of the chaos in a telegram (exact wordings and
translations differ, but each retains a similar sense):

Nicholas' response on, perhaps based on the Empress' earlier letter to
him that the concern about Petrograd was an over-reaction, was one of
irritation that "again, this fat Rodzianko has written me lots of
nonsense, to which I shall not even deign to reply." Meanwhile, events
were unfolding in Petrograd. The bulk of the garrison mutinied, starting
with the Volynsky Life Guards regiment. In addition, the Cossack units
that the government had come to rely on for crowd control, began to show
signs that they supported the people. Although few actively joined the
rioting, many officers were either shot or went into hiding; the ability
of the garrison to hold back the protests was all but nullified, symbols
of the Tsarist regime were rapidly torn down around the city and
governmental authority in the capital collapsed — not helped by the fact
that Nicholas had prorogued the Duma that morning, leaving it with no
legal authority to act. The response of the Duma, urged on by the
liberal bloc, was to establish a Temporary Committee to restore law and
order; meanwhile, the socialist parties re-established the Petrograd
Soviet, first created during the 1905 revolution, to represent workers
and soldiers. The remaining loyal units switched allegiance the next
day.

The Army Chiefs and the ministers who had come to advise the Tsar
suggested that he abdicate the throne. He did so on, on behalf of
himself and his son, the hemophiliac Tsarevich Alexei. Nicholas
nominated his brother, the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovich, to succeed
him. But the Grand Duke realised that he would have little support as
ruler, so he declined the crown on, stating that he would take it only
if that was the consensus of democratic action by the Russian
Constituent Assembly, which shall define form of government for Russia.
Six days later, Nicholas, no longer Tsar and addressed with contempt by
the sentries as "Nicholas Romanov", was reunited with his family at the
Alexander Palace at Tsarskoye Selo.}} He and his family and loyal
retainers were placed under protective custody by the Provisional
Government.}}

Provisional Government and Petrograd Soviet share power
-------------------------------------------------------

The immediate effect of the February Revolution was a widespread
atmosphere of elation and excitement in Petrograd. On, a provisional
government was announced. The center-left was well represented, and the
government was initially chaired by a liberal aristocrat, Prince Georgy
Yevgenyevich Lvov, a man with no connections to any official party. The
socialists had formed their rival body, the Petrograd Soviet (or
workers' council) four days earlier. The Petrograd Soviet and the
Provisional Government shared dual power over Russia. The Petrograd
Soviet had the stronger case for power as it controlled the workers and
the soldiers, but it didn't want to be involved in administration and
bureaucracy. On the other hand, the Provisional Government chafed at not
having absolute control over all aspects of the government, and made
many attempts to convince the Petrograd Soviet to join with the
Provisional Government.

Between February and April, the Provisional Government, which replaced
the Tsar, cooperated grudgingly with the Petrograd Soviet. This
arrangement became known as the "Dual Authority" or "Dual Power".
However, the *de facto* supremacy of the Petrograd Soviet was asserted
as early as 14 March [O.S. 1 March] (before the creation of the
Provisional Government itself), when the Petrograd Soviet issued Order
No. 1:

Order No. 1 thus ensured that the Dual Authority developed on the
Soviet's conditions. As the Provisional Government was not a publicly
elected body (having been self-proclaimed by committee members of the
old Duma), it lacked the political legitimacy to question this
arrangement and instead arranged for elections to be held later.

Aftermath
---------

Vladimir Lenin, exiled in neutral Switzerland, arrived in Petrograd from
Zürich on 3 April 1917 O.S. He immediately began to undermine the
provisional government, issuing his April Theses the next month. These
theses were in favour of "revolutionary defeatism", as opposed to the
"imperialist war" (whose "link to Capital" must be demonstrated to the
masses) and the Social-Chauvinists (such as Georgi Plekhanov the
grandfather of Russian socialism), who supported the war. Lenin also
attempted to take control of the Bolshevik movement and stirred up the
proletariat against the government with simple but meaningful slogans
such as "Peace, bread and land", "End the war without annexations or
indemnities", "All power to the Soviet" and "All land to those who work
it".

Initially, neither Lenin nor his ideas had widespread support, even
among Bolsheviks. In what became known as the July Days, approximately
half a million came out onto the streets of Petrograd in protest,
including soldiers and sailors; Lenin proved incapable of directing them
into an organised coup. The demonstrators, lacking leadership, disbanded
and the government survived. The Provisional Government saw it as a
Bolshevik coup nonetheless and issued arrest warrants for prominent
Bolsheviks. Lenin fled to Finland and other members of the Bolshevik
party were arrested. Lvov was replaced by the Socialist Revolutionary
minister Alexander Kerensky as head of the government.

Kerensky declared freedom of speech, ended capital punishment, released
thousands of political prisoners and did his best to maintain Russian
involvement in World War I, but he faced numerous challenges, most of
them related to the war: there were some very heavy military losses
still being experienced on the front; dissatisfied soldiers were
deserting in larger numbers than before; other political groups were
doing their utmost to undermine him; there was a strong movement in
favour of stopping Russia's involvement in the war, which was seen to be
draining the country, and many who had initially supported it now wanted
out; there was a great shortage of food and supplies, which was very
difficult to remedy in wartime conditions. All of these were highlighted
by the soldiers, urban workers and peasants, who claimed that little had
been gained by the February Revolution. Kerensky was expected to deliver
on his promises of jobs, land, and food almost instantaneously, and he
had failed to do so.

Another issue for Kerensky, the Kornilov Affair, arose when
Commander-in-Chief of the army, General Lavr Kornilov, directed an army
under Aleksandr Krymov to march toward Petrograd with Kerensky's
agreement. Although the details remain sketchy, Kerensky appeared to
become frightened by the possibility of a coup and the order was
countermanded (historian Richard Pipes is quite adamant that the whole
episode was engineered by Kerensky himself). On 27 August, feeling
betrayed by the Kerensky government who had previously agreed with his
views on how to restore order to Russia, Kornilov pushed on towards
Petrograd. With few troops to spare on the front, Kerensky was forced to
turn to the Petrograd Soviet for help. Bolsheviks, Mensheviks and
Socialist Revolutionaries confronted the army and convinced them to
stand down. The damage was already done, however. Right-wingers felt
betrayed, and the left wing was resurgent. Pressure from the Allies to
continue the war against Germany put the government under increasing
strain. The conflict between the "diarchy" became obvious, and,
ultimately, the regime and the dual power formed between the Petrograd
Soviet and the Provisional Government instigated by the February
Revolution was replaced in the October Revolution.

See also
--------

-   Russian Revolution of 1917
-   1905 Russian Revolution
-   World War I
-   Vladimir Lenin
-   Women in the Russian Revolution
-   List of uprisings led by women
-   Nicholas and Alexandra a biographical film of the Tsar and his
    family.

Notes
-----

References
----------

-   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   

**Online sources**

-   

External links
--------------

-   <http://www.thecorner.org/hist/russia/revo1917.htm>
-   [Leon Trotsky's
    account](http://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/works/1930-hrr/ch05.htm)
-   [Лютнева революція. Жіночий бунт, який знищив Російську імперію
    (February Revolution. Female mutiny that destroyed the Russian
    Empire)](http://www.istpravda.com.ua/articles/2011/02/25/27845/).
    Ukrayinska Pravda

Category:Protests in Russia Category:Russian Provisional Government
Category:Russian Revolution Category:Nicholas II of Russia Category:1917
in Russia
