![Diplomatic relations between world states and Russia\
](Diplomatic missions of Russia.png "Diplomatic relations between world states and Russia ")

The **foreign relations of Russia** is the policy of the Russian
government by which it guides the interactions with other nations, their
citizens and foreign organizations. This article covers the foreign
policy of the Russian Federation since the dissolution of the Soviet
Union in late 1991. For the Russian Empire to 1917 see History of
Russia.

NATO and the European Union
---------------------------

Russia is a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS),
Union of Russia and Belarus, Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the North Atlantic Cooperation Council (NACC). It
signed the NATO Partnership for Peace initiative on 22 June 1994. On 20
May 1997, NATO and Russia signed the NATO-Russia Founding Act, which the
parties hoped would provide the basis for an enduring and robust
partnership between the Alliance and Russia—one that could make an
important contribution to European security architecture in the 21st
century, though already at the time of its signing doubts were cast on
whether this accord could deliver on these ambitious goals. This
agreement was superseded by the NATO-Russia Council that was agreed at
the Reykjavik Ministerial and unveiled at the Rome NATO Summit in May
2002. On 24 June 1994, Russia and the European Union (EU) signed a
partnership and cooperation agreement.

Former Soviet Republics
-----------------------

The non-Russian countries that were once part of the USSR have been
termed the 'near abroad' by Russians. More recently, Russian leaders
have been referring to all 15 countries collectively as "Post-Soviet
Space," while asserting Russian foreign policy interest throughout the
region. After the USSR was dissolved by the presidents of Russia,
Ukraine and Belarus, Russia tried to regain some sort of influence over
the post-Soviet space by creating, on 8 December 1991, a regional
organization – the Commonwealth of Independent States. The following
years, Russia initiated a set of agreements with the Post-Soviet states
which were designed to institutionalize the relations inside the CIS.
However, most of these agreements were not fulfilled and the CIS
republics began to drift away from Russia, which at that time was
attempting to stabilize its broken economy and ties with the West.

One of the major issues which had an influence on the foreign relations
of Russia in FSU was the remaining large Russian minority populations in
many countries of the near abroad. This issue has been dealt with in
various ways by each individual country. They have posed a particular
problem in countries where they live close to the Russian border, such
as in Ukraine and Kazakhstan, with some of these Russians calling for
these areas to be absorbed into Russia. By and large, however, Russians
in the near-abroad do not favor active intervention of Russia into the
domestic affairs of neighboring countries, even in defense of the
interests of ethnic Russians. Moreover, the three Baltic states
(Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania) have clearly signaled their desire to
be outside any claimed Russian sphere of influence, as is reflected by
their joining both the NATO alliance and the European Union in 2004.

Close cultural, ethnic and historical links exist between Russia,
Belarus and Ukraine. Traditionally, at least from a Russian perspective,
they have been treated as one ethnic group, with Russians called 'Great
Russians', Belarusians 'White Russians' and Ukrainians 'Little
Russians'. This manifested itself in lower levels of nationalism in
these areas, particularly Belarus and Ukraine, during the disintegration
of the Soviet Union. However, few Ukrainians accept a "younger brother"
status relative to Russia, and Russia's efforts to insert itself into
Ukrainian domestic politics, such as Putin's endorsement of a candidate
for the Ukrainian presidency in the last election, are contentious.

Russia maintains its military bases in Armenia, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan,
Moldova, Ukraine and Tajikistan.

Russia's relationships with Georgia are at it lowest point in modern
history due to the Georgian-Russian espionage controversy and due to the
2008 South Ossetia war, Georgia broke off diplomatic relations with
Russia and has left the Commonwealth of Independent States.

Mediation in international conflicts
------------------------------------

Russia has played an important role in helping mediate international
conflicts and has been particularly actively engaged in trying to
promote a peace following the Kosovo conflict. Russia's foreign minister
claimed on 25 February 2008 that NATO and the European Union have been
considering using force to keep Serbs from leaving Kosovo following the
2008 Kosovo declaration of independence.

Russia is a co-sponsor of the Middle East peace process and supports UN
and multilateral initiatives in the Persian Gulf, Cambodia, Burma,
Angola, the former Yugoslavia, and Haiti. Russia is a founding member of
the Contact Group and (since the Denver Summit in June 1997) a member of
the G8. In November 1998, Russia joined the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation Forum (APEC). Russia has contributed troops to the NATO-led
stabilization force in Bosnia and has affirmed its respect for
international law and OSCE principles. Russia has accepted UN and/or
OSCE involvement in instances of regional conflict in neighboring
countries, including the dispatch of observers to Georgia, Moldova,
Tajikistan, and Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan.

Russia supported, on 16 May 2007, the set up of the international
tribunal to try the suspects in the murder of the Lebanese Prime
Minister, Rafiq Hariri.

Territorial disputes
--------------------

Throughout history, there have been many territorial disputes concerning
the Russian Federation.

-   The Kuril Islands dispute concerns the islands of Iturup, Kunashir,
    and Shikotan and the Khabomai group had belonged to Russian Empire
    until the Russo-Japanese War, when Russia lost them and the south
    part of the Sakhalin island. Russia (the Soviet Union) got them back
    in the end of the WWII during the 1945 Yalta Conference, when the
    Allies agreed to the cession of the islands to the USSR. But the
    fact of its belonging to the USSR was not involved in the
    Capitulation of Japan documents. Later it gave Japan a chance to
    demand the return of the "controversial northern territories".
-   Disputes over the boundary with the People's Republic of China were
    finally resolved on 21 July 2008. On that day the Foreign Ministers
    of the two countries signed an agreement in Beijing. Under the
    agreement, Russia ceded approximately 174 km² of territory to China.
    The territory transferred comprised Tarabarov Island and
    approximately half of Bolshoy Ussuriysky Island. The area
    transferred was largely uninhabited. The settlement of their border
    dispute followed over 40 years of negotiations. The final settlement
    was the result of the Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly
    Cooperation which was concluded on 2 June 2005 and signed by Chinese
    Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing and his Russian counterpart, Sergei
    Lavrov. This followed talks in Vladivostok. There is now no border
    dispute between Russia and China along their 4300 km border.
-   Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet determined among all littoral
    states. Issues between Russia and the states bordering itAzerbaijan
    and Kazakhstanwere settled in 2003. Russia has no common land or
    Caspian-sea border with Turkmenistan and Iran, which do not agree
    with the Caspian Sea settlements.
-   Estonian and Russian negotiators reached a technical border
    agreement in December 1996. The border treaty was initialed in 1999.
    On 18 May 2005 Estonian Foreign Minister Urmas Paet and his Russian
    colleague Sergei Lavrov signed in Moscow the [“Treaty between the
    Government of the Republic of Estonia and the Government of the
    Russian Federation on the Estonian-Russian
    border”](http://web-static.vm.ee/static/failid/394/Est-Rus_border_treaty.pdf)
    and the “Treaty between the Government of the Republic of Estonia
    and the Government of the Russian Federation on the Delimitation of
    the Maritime Zones in the Gulf of Finland and the Gulf of Narva”. On
    20 June 2005 the Riigikogu (Estonian Parliament) ratified the signed
    treaties by adopting ratification act, objected by Russia. The
    President of Estonia Arnold Rüütel announced them on 22 June 2005.
    As the preamble of the ratification act mentioned the Tartu peace
    treaty, Russia interpreted this as in theory giving Estonia a right
    to claim some territories of Pskov and Leningrad Oblast of Russia
    later. On 31 August 2005 Russian President Vladimir Putin gave a
    written order to the Russian Foreign Ministry to notify the Estonian
    side of “Russia’s intention not to participate in the border
    treaties between the Russian Federation and the Republic of
    Estonia". On 6 September 2005 the Foreign Ministry of the Russian
    Federation forwarded a note to Estonia, in which Russia informed
    that it did not intend to become a party to the border treaties
    between Estonia and Russia and did not consider itself bound by the
    circumstances concerning the object and the purposes of the
    treaties.
-   Russia has made no territorial claim in Antarctica (but has reserved
    the right to do so) and does not recognize the claims of any other
    nation. The Soviet Union signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1960.
-   Disputes over the boundary with Georgia relating to Russia's
    recognition of Georgian regions, South Ossetia and Abkhazia as
    independent states, due to the 2008 South Ossetia war and which has
    led to the severance of all diplomatic relations between them.
-   Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, Moscow refused to
    recognise Ukrainian sovereignty over Sevastopol as well as over the
    surrounding Crimean oblast, using the argument that the city was
    never practically integrated into the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
    Republic because of its military status. This claim was relinquished
    in the bilateral Peace and Friendship Treaty, which confirmed that
    both the Crimea and Sevastopol belong to Ukraine. A separate treaty
    established the terms of a long-term lease of land and resources in
    and around Sevastopol by Russia.

International membership
------------------------

Membership in International Organizations:

Russia holds a permanent seat, which grants it veto power, on the
Security Council of the United Nations (UN). Prior to 1991, the Soviet
Union held Russia's UN seat, but, after the breakup of the Soviet Union
the Russian government informed the United Nations that Russia will
continue the Soviet Union's membership at the United Nations and all
other UN organs.

Russia is an active member of numerous UN system organizations,
including the UN General Assembly and Security Council; Food and
Agriculture Organization; United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development; UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization; UN
Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees; United Nations Industrial
Development Organization; United Nations Economic Commission for Europe

Russia also participates in some of the most important UN peacekeeping
missions including the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone; United
Nations Iraq–Kuwait Observation Mission; United Nations Institute for
Training and Research; United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina;
United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire; United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea; United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka;
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia; United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor; United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization; United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara; United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

Russia also holds memberships in the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation,
Bank for International Settlements, Black Sea Economic Cooperation,
Council of the Baltic Sea States, Council of Europe, European
Organization for Nuclear Research (observer), Commonwealth of
Independent States, Collective Security Treaty Organisation,
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific,
Group of 8, Group of 20, International Atomic Energy Agency,
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International
Civil Aviation Organization, International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, International Development Association, International Finance
Corporation, International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement,
International Hydrographic Organization, International Labour
Organization, International Monetary Fund, International Maritime
Organization, International Mobile Satellite Organization, International
Criminal Police Organization, International Olympic Committee,
International Organization for Migration (observer), International
Organization for Standardization, International Telecommunication Union,
Latin American Integration Association (observer), Non-Aligned Movement
(observer), Nuclear Suppliers Group, Organization of American States
(observer), Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (observer), Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries, Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe, Permanent Court of Arbitration, Partnership for Peace, Shanghai
Cooperation Organisation, World Tourism Organization, Universal Postal
Union, World Customs Organization, World Federation of Trade Unions,
World Health Organization, World Intellectual Property Organization,
World Meteorological Organization, World Trade Organization, Zangger
Committee

Vladimir Putin's policies
-------------------------

Vladimir Putin's presidency lasted from January 2000 until May 2008 and
again from 2012. In international affairs, Putin made increasingly
critical public statements regarding the foreign policy of the United
States and other Western countries. In February 2007, at the annual
Munich Conference on Security Policy, he criticised what he called the
United States' monopolistic dominance in global relations, and pointed
out that the United States displayed an "almost uncontained hyper use of
force in international relations". He said the result of it is that "no
one feels safe! Because no one can feel that international law is like a
stone wall that will protect them. Of course such a policy stimulates an
arms race." Some political journalists have said this criticism came as
a result of the global rise in oil prices.

Putin proposed certain initiatives such as establishing international
centres for the enrichment of uranium and prevention of deploying
weapons in outer space. In a January 2007 interview Putin said Russia is
in favour of a democratic multipolar world and of strengthening the
system of international law.

While Putin is often characterised as an autocrat by the Western media
and some politicians, his relationship with former US President George
W. Bush, former Brazilian President Luis Inacio Lula da Silva, former
Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, former German Chancellor Gerhard
Schröder, former French President Jacques Chirac, and former Italian
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi are reported to be personally friendly.
Putin's relationship with Germany's new Chancellor, Angela Merkel, is
reported to be "cooler" and "more business-like" than his partnership
with Gerhard Schröder, who accepted a job with a Russian led consortium
after vacating office,

<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nord_Stream_AG> In the wake of the 11
September attacks on the United States, he agreed to the establishment
of coalition military bases in Central Asia before and during the US-led
invasion of Afghanistan. Russian nationalists objected to the
establishment of any US military presence on the territory of the former
Soviet Union, and had expected Putin to keep the US out of the Central
Asian republics, or at the very least extract a commitment from
Washington to withdraw from these bases as soon as the immediate
military necessity had passed.

During the Iraq disarmament crisis 2002–2003, Putin opposed Washington's
move to invade Iraq without the benefit of a United Nations Security
Council resolution explicitly authorizing the use of military force.
After the official end of the war was announced, American president
George W. Bush asked the United Nations to lift sanctions on Iraq. Putin
supported lifting of the sanctions in due course, arguing that the UN
commission first be given a chance to complete its work on the search
for weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.

In 2005, Putin and former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder negotiated
the construction of a major gas pipeline over the Baltic exclusively
between Russia and Germany. Schröder also attended Putin's 53rd birthday
in Saint Petersburg the same year.

The Commonwealth of Independent States[ (CIS), seen in Moscow as its
traditional sphere of influence, became one of the foreign policy
priorities under Putin, as the EU and NATO have grown to encompass much
of Central Europe and, more recently, the Baltic states.

During the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election, Putin twice visited
Ukraine before the election to show his support for Ukrainian Prime
Minister Viktor Yanukovych, who was widely seen as a pro-Kremlin
candidate, and he congratulated him on his anticipated victory before
the official election returns had been in. Putin's personal support for
Yanukovych was criticized as unwarranted interference in the affairs of
a sovereign state (*See also The Orange revolution*). Crises also
developed in Russia's relations with Georgia and Moldova, both former
Soviet republics accusing Moscow of supporting separatist entities in
their territories.

Russia's relations with the Baltic states also remain tense. In 2007,
Russo-Estonian relations deteriorated further as a result of the Bronze
Soldier controversy.

Putin took an active personal part in promoting the Act of Canonical
Communion with the Moscow Patriarchate signed 17 May 2007 that restored
relations between the Moscow-based Russian Orthodox Church and Russian
Orthodox Church outside Russia after the 80-year schism.

In his annual address to the Federal Assembly on 26 April 2007, Putin
announced plans to declare a moratorium on the observance of the Treaty
on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe by Russia until all NATO members
ratified it and started observing its provisions, as Russia had been
doing on a unilateral basis. Putin argues that as new NATO members have
not even signed the treaty so far, an imbalance in the presence of NATO
and Russian armed forces in Europe creates a real threat and an
unpredictable situation for Russia. NATO members said they would refuse
to ratify the treaty until Russia complied with its 1999 commitments
made in Istanbul whereby Russia should remove troops and military
equipment from Moldova and Georgia. Russian Foreign Minister Sergey
Lavrov was quoted as saying in response that "Russia has long since
fulfilled all its Istanbul obligations relevant to CFE". Russia has
suspended its participation in the CFE as of midnight Moscow time on 11
December 2007. On 12 December 2007, the United States officially said it
"deeply regretted the Russian Federation's decision to 'suspend'
implementation of its obligations under the Treaty on Conventional Armed
Forces in Europe (CFE)." State Department spokesman Sean McCormack, in a
written statement, added that "Russia's conventional forces are the
largest on the European continent, and its unilateral action damages
this successful arms control regime." NATO's primary concern arising
from Russia's suspension is that Moscow could now accelerate its
military presence in the Northern Caucasus.

The months following Putin's Munich speech were marked by tension and a
surge in rhetoric on both sides of the Atlantic. So, Vladimir Putin said
at the anniversary of the Victory Day, "these threats are not becoming
fewer but are only transforming and changing their appearance. These new
threats, just as under the Third Reich, show the same contempt for human
life and the same aspiration to establish an exclusive dictate over the
world." This was interpreted by some Russian and Western commentators as
comparing the U.S. to Nazi Germany. On the eve of the 33rd Summit of the
G8 in Heiligendamm, American journalist Anne Applebaum, who is married
to a Polish politician, wrote that "Whether by waging cyberwarfare on
Estonia, threatening the gas supplies of Lithuania, or boycotting
Georgian wine and Polish meat, he [Putin] has, over the past few years,
made it clear that he intends to reassert Russian influence in the
former communist states of Europe, whether those states want Russian
influence or not. At the same time, he has also made it clear that he no
longer sees Western nations as mere benign trading partners, but rather
as Cold War-style threats."

British historian Max Hastings described Putin as "Stalin's spiritual
heir" in his article "Will we have to fight Russia in this Century?".
British academic Norman Stone in his article "No wonder they like Putin"
compared Putin to General Charles de Gaulle. Adi Ignatius argues that
"Putin... is not a Stalin. There are no mass purges in Russia today, no
broad climate of terror. But Putin is reconstituting a strong state, and
anyone who stands in his way will pay for it". In the same article,
Hastings continues that although "a return to the direct military
confrontation of the Cold War is unlikely", "the notion of Western
friendship with Russia is a dead letter" Both Russian and American
officials always denied the idea of a new Cold War. So, the US Secretary
of Defense Robert Gates said yet on the Munich Conference: "We all face
many common problems and challenges that must be addressed in
partnership with other countries, including Russia.... One Cold War was
quite enough." Vladimir Putin said prior to 33rd G8 Summit, on 4 June:
"we do not want confrontation; we want to engage in dialogue. However,
we want a dialogue that acknowledges the equality of both parties’
interests."

Putin publicly opposed to a U.S. missile shield in Europe, presented
President George W. Bush with a counterproposal on 7 June 2007 of
sharing the use of the Soviet-era radar system in Azerbaijan rather than
building a new system in Poland and the Czech Republic. Putin expressed
readiness to modernize the Gabala radar station, which has been in
operation since 1986. Putin proposed it would not be necessary to place
interceptor missiles in Poland then, but interceptors could be placed in
NATO member Turkey or Iraq. Putin suggested also equal involvement of
interested European countries in the project.

In a 4 June 2007, interview to journalists of G8 countries, when
answering the question of whether Russian nuclear forces may be focused
on European targets in case "the United States continues building a
strategic shield in Poland and the Czech Republic", Putin admitted that
"if part of the United States’ nuclear capability is situated in Europe
and that our military experts consider that they represent a potential
threat then we will have to take appropriate retaliatory steps. What
steps? Of course we must have new targets in Europe."

The end of 2006 brought strained relations between Russia and Britain in
the wake of the death of a former FSB officer in London by poisoning. On
20 July 2007 UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown expelled "four Russian
envoys over Putin's refusal to extradite ex-KGB agent Andrei Lugovoi,
wanted in the UK for the murder of fellow former spy Alexander
Litvinenko in London." The Russian constitution prohibits the
extradition of Russian nationals to third countries. British Foreign
Secretary David Miliband said that "this situation is not unique, and
other countries have amended their constitutions, for example to give
effect to the European Arrest Warrant".

Miliband's statement was widely publicized by Russian media as a British
proposal to change the Russian constitution. According to VCIOM, 62% of
Russians are against changing the Constitution in this respect. The
British Ambassador in Moscow Tony Brenton said that the UK is not asking
Russia to break its Constitution, but rather interpret it in such a way
that would make Lugovoi's extradition possible. Putin, in response,
advised British officials to "fix their heads" rather than propose
changing the Russian constitution and said that the British proposals
were "a relic of a colonial-era mindset".

When Litvinenko was dying from radiation poisoning, he allegedly accused
Putin of directing the assassination in a statement which was released
shortly after his death by his friend Alex Goldfarb. Critics have
doubted that Litvinenko is the true author of the released statement.
When asked about the Litvinenko accusations, Putin said that a statement
released after death of its author "naturally deserves no comment".

The expulsions were seen as "the biggest rift since the countries
expelled each other's diplomats in 1996 after a spying dispute." In
response to the situation, Putin stated "I think we will overcome this
mini-crisis. Russian-British relations will develop normally. On both
the Russian side and the British side, we are interested in the
development of those relations." Despite this, British Ambassador Tony
Brenton was told by the Russian Foreign Ministry that UK diplomats would
be given 10 days before they were expelled in response. The Russian
government also announced that it would suspend issuing visas to UK
officials and froze cooperation on counterterrorism in response to
Britain suspending contacts with their Federal Security Service.

Alexander Shokhin, president of the Russian Union of Industrialists and
Entrepreneurs warned that British investors in Russia will "face greater
scrutiny from tax and regulatory authorities. [And] They could also lose
out in government tenders". Some see the crisis as originating with
Britain's decision to grant Putin's former patron, Russian billionaire
Boris Berezovsky, political asylum in 2003. Earlier in 2007, Berezovsky
had called for the overthrow of Putin.

On 10 December 2007, Russia ordered the British Council to halt work at
its regional offices in what was seen as the latest round of a dispute
over the murder of Alexander Litvinenko; Britain said Russia's move was
illegal.

Following the Peace Mission 2007 military exercises jointly conducted by
the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) member states, Putin
announced on 17 August 2007 the resumption on a permanent basis of
long-distance patrol flights of Russia's strategic bombers that were
suspended in 1992. US State Department spokesman Sean McCormack was
quoted as saying in response that "if Russia feels as though they want
to take some of these old aircraft out of mothballs and get them flying
again, that's their decision." The announcement made during the SCO
summit in the light of joint Russian-Chinese military exercises,
first-ever in history to be held on Russian territory, makes some
believe that Putin is inclined to set up an anti-NATO bloc or the Asian
version of OPEC. When presented with the suggestion that "Western
observers are already likening the SCO to a military organisation that
would stand in opposition to NATO", Putin answered that "this kind of
comparison is inappropriate in both form and substance". Russian Chief
of the General Staff Yury Baluyevsky was quoted as saying that "there
should be no talk of creating a military or political alliance or union
of any kind, because this would contradict the founding principles of
SCO".

The resumption of long-distance flights of Russia's strategic bombers
was followed by the announcement by Russian Defense Minister Anatoliy
Serdyukov during his meeting with Putin on 5 December 2007, that 11
ships, including the aircraft carrier *Kuznetsov*, would take part in
the first major navy sortie into the Mediterranean since Soviet times.
The sortie was to be backed up by 47 aircraft, including strategic
bombers. According to Serdyukov, this is an effort to resume regular
Russian naval patrols on the world's oceans, the view that is also
supported by Russian media. The military analyst from *Novaya Gazeta*
Pavel Felgenhauer believes that the accident-prone *Kuznetsov* is
scarcely seaworthy and is more of a menace to her crew than any putative
enemy.

In September 2007, Putin visited Indonesia and in doing so became the
first Russian leader to visit the country in more than 50 years. In the
same month, Putin also attended the APEC meeting held in Sydney,
Australia where he met with Australian Prime Minister John Howard and
signed a uranium trade deal. This was the first visit of a Russian
president to Australia.

On 16 October 2007 Putin visited Tehran, Iran to participate in the
Second Caspian Summit, where he met with Iranian leader Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad. Other participants were leaders of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan,
and Turkmenistan. This is the first visit of a leader from the Kremlin
to Iran since Joseph Stalin's participation in the Tehran Conference in
1943. At a press conference after the summit Putin said that "all our
(Caspian) states have the right to develop their peaceful nuclear
programmes without any restrictions". During the summit it was also
agreed that its participants, under no circumstances, would let any
third-party state use their territory as a base for aggression or
military action against any other participant.

On 26 October 2007, at a press conference following the 20th Russia-EU
Summit in Portugal, Putin proposed to create a Russian-European
Institute for Freedom and Democracy headquartered either in Brussels or
in one of the European capitals, and added that "we are ready to supply
funds for financing it, just as Europe covers the costs of projects in
Russia". This newly proposed institution is expected to monitor human
rights violations in Europe and contribute to development of European
democracy.

Robert Kagan, reflecting on what underlay the fundamental rift between
Putin's Russia and the EU wrote in February 2008: " Europe's nightmares
are the 1930s; Russia's nightmares are the 1990s. Europe sees the answer
to its problems in transcending the nation-state and power. For
Russians, the solution is in restoring them. So what happens when a
21st-century entity faces the challenge of a 19th-century power? The
contours of the conflict are already emerging—in diplomatic stand-offs
over Kosovo, Ukraine, Georgia and Estonia; in conflicts over gas and oil
pipelines; in nasty diplomatic exchanges between Russia and Britain; and
in a return to Russian military exercises of a kind not seen since the
Cold War. Europeans are apprehensive, with good reason."

Russian President Vladimir Putin and ex-U.S. President George W. Bush
failed to resolve their differences over U.S. plans for the planned
missile defense system based in Poland and the Czech Republic, on their
meeting in the Russian Black Sea resort of Sochi on 6 April 2008. Putin
made clear that he does not agree with the decision to establish sites
in the Eastern European countries, but said they had agreed a "strategic
framework" to guide future U.S.-Russian relations, in which Russia and
the U.S. said they recognized that the era in which each had considered
the other to be a "strategic threat or enemy" was over. Putin expressed
cautious optimism that the two sides could find a way to cooperate over
missile defense and described his eight-year relationship as Russian
president with Bush as "mostly positive". The summit was the final
meeting between Bush and Putin as presidents and follows both leaders'
attendance at last the NATO summit in Romania 2 April 2008 – 4 April
2008. That summit also highlighted differences between Washington and
Moscow over U.S.-backed proposals to extend the military alliance to
include the former Soviet republics of Ukraine and Georgia. Russia
opposes the proposed expansion, fearing it will reduce its own influence
over its neighbours. Fareed Zakaria suggests that the 2008 South Ossetia
War turned out to be a diplomatic disaster for Russia. He suggests that
it was a major strategic blunder, turning neighboring nations such as
Ukraine to embrace the United States and other Western nations more.
George Friedman, founder and CEO of private intelligence agency
Stratfor, takes an opposite view, arguing that both the war and Russian
foreign policy have been successful in expanding Russia's influence.

In July 2012 Putin said in address during a meeting with Russian
ambassadors in Moscow:

### Current issues

In late 2013, Russian-American relations were at a low point. The United
States canceled a summit (for the first time since 1960), after Putin
gave asylum to Edward Snowden. Washington regarded Russia as
obstructionist and a spoiler regarding Syria, Iran, Cuba and Venezuela.
In turn, those nations look to Russia for protection against the United
States. Europe needs Russian gas, but worries about interference in the
affairs of Eastern Europe. Russia remains angry over the expansion of
NATO into Eastern Europe. Central Asia sees Moscow as a former overlord,
which is too powerful to ignore, even as countries assist American
involvement in Afghanistan. In Asia, India has moved from a close ally
of the Soviet Union to a partner of the United States with strong
nuclear and commercial ties. Japan and Russia remain at odds over the
ownership of the Kurile islands. This dispute has hindered cooperation
for decades. China has moved from a client state of Russia in the 1950s,
to a bitter antagonist in the 1960s and 1970s, to a situation where its
economic powerhouse sees Russia as a source of raw materials, as well as
an ally in the United Nations.

See also
--------

-   Foreign relations of the Soviet Union
-   List of diplomatic missions in Russia
-   List of diplomatic missions of Russia
-   Foreign policy of Vladimir Putin
-   Visa requirements for Russian citizens
-   Arctic policy of Russia

Further reading
---------------

-   Ambrosio, Thomas, and Geoffrey Vandrovec. "Mapping the Geopolitics
    of the Russian Federation: The Federal Assembly Addresses of Putin
    and Medvedev." *Geopolitics* (2013) 18\#2 pp 435–466.
-   Gvosdev, Nikolas K., and Christopher Marsh. *Russian Foreign Policy:
    Interests, Vectors, and Sectors* (Washington: CQ Press, 2013)
    [excerpt and text
    search](http://www.amazon.com/Russian-Foreign-Policy-Interests-Vectors-ebook/dp/B00G73NMJK/)
-   Hopf, Ted, ed. *Understandings of Russian Foreign Policy* (1999)
-   Kanet, Roger E. *Russian foreign policy in the 21st century*
    (Palgrave Macmillan, 2010)
-   Larson, Deborah Welch, and Alexei Shevchenko. "Status seekers:
    Chinese and Russian responses to US primacy." *International
    Security* (2010) 34\#4 pp 63–95.
-   Legvold, Robert, ed. *Russian Foreign Policy in the 21st Century and
    the Shadow of the Past* (2007)
-   Menkiszak, Marek:
    [<http://www.fiia.fi/en/publication/341/responsibility_to_protect>...\_itself/
    "Responsibility to protect... itself? Russia’s strategy towards the
    crisis in Syria"], FIIA Briefing Paper 131, [The Finnish Institute
    of International Affairs](http://www.fiia.fi/en/).
-   Roberts, Sean P.: [Russia as an international actor: The view from
    Europe and the
    US](http://www.fiia.fi/en/publication/344/russia_as_an_international_actor/),
    FIIA Report 37 (2013), [The Finnish Institute of International
    Affairs](http://www.fiia.fi/en/home)
-   Stent, Angela E. *The Limits of Partnership: U.S. Russian Relations
    in the Twenty-First Century* (Princeton UP, 2014) 355 pages;
    [excerpt and text
    search](http://books.google.com/books?id=jfaKAQAAQBAJ)
-   Tsygankov, Andrei P. "The Russia-NATO mistrust: Ethnophobia and the
    double expansion to contain “the Russian Bear”." *Communist and
    Post-Communist Studies* (2013).
-   Yefremenko, Dmitry. Forced or Desired Modernity? Russia’s Chances in
    the Post-American world. // Russia in Global Affairs, 2010, July /
    September, No. 3. - P. 36-49. Mode of access:
    <http://eng.globalaffairs.ru/number/Forced-or-Desired-Modernity-14996>
-   Yefremenko, Dmitry. Waiting for a Storm. Russian Foreign Policy in
    the Era of Change. // Russia in Global Affairs, 2012, April-June,
    No. 2. - P. 18-32. Mode of access:
    <http://eng.globalaffairs.ru/number/Waiting-for-a-Storm-15571>

References
----------

External links
--------------

-   ["Concept of the Foreign Policy of the Russian
    Federation"](http://www.mid.ru/brp_4.nsf/0/76389FEC168189ED44257B2E0039B16D),
    February 2013, Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Russia)
-   [Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian
    Federation](http://www.mid.ru/)
-   [Russia and Its
    Neighbors](http://repository.library.georgetown.edu/handle/10822/552656)
    from the [Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital
    Archives](http://www.library.georgetown.edu/digital/krogh)
-   [Foreign relations of
    Russia](http://countrystudies.us/russia/76.htm)
-   [From decoupling to recoupling: A new security relationship between
    Russia and Western
    Europe?](http://www.iss.europa.eu/nc/actualites/actualite/select_category/21/article/from-decoupling-to-recouplingbra-new-security-relationship-between-russia-and-western-europe/),
    Chaillot Paper No. 31, April 1998, European Union Institute for
    Security Studies
-   [Containing Russia: Back to the
    Future?](http://www.mid.ru/brp_4.nsf/e78a48070f128a7b43256999005bcbb3/8f8005f0c5ca3710c325731d0022e227?OpenDocument),
    July 2007 article by Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergey
    Lavrov.
-   [In Like a Dove, Out Like a
    Hawk.](http://www.themoscowtimes.com/sitemap/paid/2008/02/article/in-like-a-dove-out-like-a-hawk/361373.html)
    By Nikolaus von Twickel *The Moscow Times* 22 February 2008. Issue
    3848. Page 1.
-   [Russia & World](http://rbth.ru/rubrics/russia_and_world.html) on
    Russia Beyond the Headlines
-   -   

Category:Foreign relations of Russia Category:Politics of Russia
