At its founding, the **Soviet Union** was considered a pariah by most
governments because of its communism, and as such was denied diplomatic
recognition by most states. Less than a quarter century later, the
Soviet Union not only had official relations with the majority of the
nations of the world, but had actually progressed to the role of a
superpower.

By 1945, the USSR — a founding member of the United Nations — was one of
the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, giving it the
right to veto any of the Security Council's resolutions (*see* Soviet
Union and the United Nations). During the Cold War, the Soviet Union
vied with the United States for geopolitical influence; this competition
was manifested in the creation of numerous treaties and pacts dealing
with military alliances and economic trade agreements, and proxy wars.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs headed Soviet foreign policy. Andrei
Gromyko was Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs for nearly thirty years.

Ideology and objectives of Soviet foreign policy
------------------------------------------------

According to Soviet theorists, the basic character of Soviet foreign
policy was set forth in Vladimir Lenin's *Decree on Peace*, adopted by
the Second Congress of Soviets in November 1917. It set forth the dual
nature of Soviet foreign policy, which encompasses both proletarian
internationalism and peaceful coexistence. On the one hand, proletarian
internationalism refers to the common cause of the working classes of
all countries in struggling to overthrow the bourgeoisie and to
establish communist regimes. Peaceful coexistence, on the other hand,
refers to measures to ensure relatively peaceful
government-to-government relations with capitalist states. Both policies
can be pursued simultaneously: "Peaceful coexistence does not rule out
but presupposes determined opposition to imperialist aggression and
support for peoples defending their revolutionary gains or fighting
foreign oppression."

The Soviet commitment in practice to proletarian internationalism
declined since the founding of the Soviet state, although this component
of ideology still had some effect on later formulation and execution of
Soviet foreign policy. Although pragmatic raisons d'état undoubtedly
accounted for much of more recent Soviet foreign policy, the ideology of
class struggle still played a role in providing a worldview and certain
loose guidelines for action in the 1980s. Marxist-Leninist ideology
reinforces other characteristics of political culture that create an
attitude of competition and conflict with other states.

The general foreign policy goals of the Soviet Union were formalized in
a party program ratified by delegates to the Twenty-Seventh Party
Congress in February–March 1986. According to the program, "the main
goals and guidelines of the CPSU's international policy" included
ensuring favorable external conditions conducive to building communism
in the Soviet Union; eliminating the threat of world war; disarmament;
strengthening the "world socialist system"; developing "equal and
friendly" relations with "liberated" [Third World] countries; peaceful
coexistence with the capitalist countries; and solidarity with communist
and revolutionary-democratic parties, the international workers'
movement, and national liberation struggles.

Although these general foreign policy goals were apparently conceived in
terms of priorities, the emphasis and ranking of the priorities have
changed over time in response to domestic and international stimuli.
After Mikhail Gorbachev became general Secretary of the Communist Party
in 1985, for instance, some Western analysts discerned in the ranking of
priorities a possible de-emphasis of Soviet support for national
liberation movements. Although the emphasis and ranking of priorities
were subject to change, two basic goals of Soviet foreign policy
remained constant: national security (safeguarding Communist Party of
the Soviet Union (CPSU) rule through internal control and the
maintenance of adequate military forces) and, since the late 1940s,
influence over Eastern Europe.

Many Western analysts have examined the way Soviet behavior in various
regions and countries supports the general goals of Soviet foreign
policy. These analysts have assessed Soviet behavior in the 1970s and
1980s as placing primary emphasis on relations with the United States,
which was considered the foremost threat to the national security of the
Soviet Union. Second priority was given to relations with Eastern Europe
(the other members of the Warsaw Pact) and Western Europe (the European
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization—NATO). Third priority
was given to the littoral or propinquitous states along the southern
border of the Soviet Union: Turkey (a NATO member), Iran, Afghanistan,
People's Republic of China, Mongolia, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea (North Korea), and Japan. Regions near to, but not bordering,
the Soviet Union were assigned fourth priority. These included the
Middle East and North Africa, South Asia, and Southeast Asia. Last
priority was given to sub-Saharan Africa, the islands in the Pacific and
Indian Oceans, and Latin America, except insofar as these regions either
provided opportunities for strategic basing or bordered on strategic
naval straits or sea lanes. In general, Soviet foreign policy was most
concerned with superpower relations (and, more broadly, relations
between the members of NATO and the Warsaw Pact), but during the 1980s
Soviet leaders pursued improved relations with all regions of the world
as part of its foreign policy objectives.

Before World War II
-------------------

It is possible to detect three distinct phases in Soviet foreign policy
between the conclusion of the Russian Civil War and the Nazi-Soviet Pact
in 1939, determined in part by political struggles within the USSR, and
in part by dynamic developments in international relations and the
effect these had on Soviet security.

Vladimir Lenin and the Bolsheviks, once in power, believed their October
Revolution would ignite the world's socialists and lead to a "World
Revolution." Lenin set up the Communist International (Comintern) to
export revolution to the rest of Europe and Asia. Indeed, Lenin set out
to liberate all of Asia from imperialist and capitalist control.

The first priority for Soviet foreign policy was Europe, above all
Germany, which was the country that Lenin most admired and thought most
ready for revolution. The historian Robert Service noted that Lenin and
the other Bolshevik leaders had a very idealized picture of Germany that
bore little relation to reality. Lenin was most disappointed when,
following the October Revolution, a similar revolution did not break out
in Germany as he had expected and hoped for, forcing him to sign the
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918 to take Russia out of World War I.
Brest-Litovsk was an immense shock to the Bolsheviks, and afterwards a
new policy emerged of both seeking pragmatic co-operation with the
Western powers when it suited Soviet interests while at the same time
trying to promote a Communist revolution whenever possible. In the
immediate aftermath of World War I, the Soviets encouraged Communist
uprisings in Germany and saw Béla Kun briefly establish the Hungarian
Soviet Republic. Had it not been for the Russian Civil War, Lenin would
had sent the Red Army into Central Europe into 1919 to export Communism.
After the failure of these efforts, Lenin, assuming that capitalism was
not going to collapse at once as he had hoped, made a major effort in
the early 1920s to lure German corporations into investing in the Soviet
Union as a way of modernizing the country. Lenin's Germanophilia was
controversial within the Bolsheviks, with many of his colleagues
complaining that he went too far with his liking for all things German.
As part of the effort to join a German-Soviet alliance, the Soviets
signed the Treaty of Rapallo in 1922.

Lenin's plans failed, although Russia did manage to hold onto the
Central Asian and Caucasian domains that had been part of the Russian
Empire. The revolutionary stage ended after the Soviet defeat in the war
with Poland in 1921. As Europe's revolutions were crushed and
revolutionary zeal dwindled, the Bolsheviks shifted their ideological
focus from the world revolution and building socialism around the globe
to building socialism inside the Soviet Union, while keeping some of the
rhetoric and operations of the Comintern continuing. In the mid-1920s, a
policy of peaceful co-existence began to emerge, with Soviet diplomats
attempting to end the country's isolation, and concluding bilateral
arrangements with capitalist governments. Agreement was reached with
Germany, Europe's other pariah of the day, in the Treaty of Rapallo in
1922.

There were, however, still those in the Soviet government, most notably
Leon Trotsky, who argued for the continuation of the revolutionary
process, in terms of his theory of Permanent Revolution. After Lenin's
death in 1924, Trotsky and the internationalists were opposed by Joseph
Stalin and Nikolai Bukharin, who developed the notion of Socialism in
One Country. The foreign policy counterpart of Socialism in One Country
was that of the United Front, with foreign Communists urged to enter
into alliances with reformist left-wing parties and national liberation
movements of all kinds. The high point of this strategy was the
partnership in China between the Chinese Communist Party and the
nationalist Kuomintang, a policy favoured by Stalin in particular, and a
source of bitter dispute between him and Trotsky. The Popular Front
policy in China effectively crashed to ruin in 1927, when Kuomintang
leader Chiang Kai-shek massacred the native Communists and expelled all
of his Soviet advisors, notably Mikhail Borodin.

The following year, after defeating opponents from both the left (led by
Trotsky and Grigory Zinoviev) and the right (led by Nikolai Bukharin),
Stalin began the wholesale collectivization of Soviet agriculture,
accompanied by a major program of planned industrialization. This new
radical phase was paralleled by the formulation of a new doctrine in the
International, that of the so-called Third Period, an ultra-left switch
in policy, which argued that social democracy, whatever shape it took,
was a form of social fascism, socialist in theory but fascist in
practice. All foreign Communist parties – increasingly agents of Soviet
policy – were to concentrate their efforts in a struggle against their
rivals in the working-class movement, ignoring the threat of real
fascism. There were to be no united fronts against a greater enemy. The
catastrophic effects of this policy, and the negative effect it had on
Soviet security, was to be fully demonstrated by Adolf Hitler's seizure
of power in Germany in 1933, followed by the destruction of the German
Communist Party, the strongest in Europe. The Third Way and social
fascism were quickly dropped into the dustbin of history. Once again
collaboration with other progressive elements was the key, in the form
of the Popular Front, which cast the net still wider to embrace moderate
bourgeois parties. Soviet-German cooperation, extensive until 1933, was
now limited.

Hand-in-hand with the promotion of Popular Fronts, Maxim Litvinov, the
Soviet Commissar for Foreign Affairs between 1930 and 1939, aimed at
closer alliances with Western governments, and placed ever greater
emphasis on collective security. The new policy led to the Soviet Union
joining the League of Nations in 1934 and the subsequent conclusion of
alliances with France and Czechoslovakia. In the League the Soviets were
active in demanding action against imperialist aggression, a particular
danger to them after the 1931 Japanese invasion of Manchuria, which
eventually resulted in the Soviet-Japanese Battle of Khalkhin Gol.

However, against the rise of militant fascism, the League was unlikely
to accomplish very much. Litvinov and others in the Commissariat for
Foreign Affairs continued to conduct quiet diplomatic initiatives with
Nazi Germany, even as the USSR took a stand in trying to preserve the
Second Spanish Republic, and its Popular Front government, from the
Fascist rebellion of 1936. The Munich Agreement of 1938, the first stage
in the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia, gave rise to Soviet fears that
they were likely to be abandoned in a possible war with Germany. In the
face of continually dragging and seemingly hopeless negotiations with
Great Britain and France, a new cynicism and hardness entered Soviet
foreign relations when Litvinov was replaced by Vyacheslav Molotov in
May 1939. The Soviets no longer sought collective but individual
security, and the Pact with Hitler was signed, giving Soviets protection
from the most aggressive European power and increasing the Soviet sphere
of influence.

World War II
------------

Stalin controlled the foreign policy of the Soviet Union, with
Vyacheslav Molotov as the foreign minister. Their policy was neutrality
until August 1939, followed by friendly relations with Germany in order
to carve up Eastern Europe. After he ignored repeated warnings, Stalin
was stunned when Hitler invaded in June 1941. Stalin quickly came to
terms with Britain and the United States, cemented through a series of
summit meetings. The U.S. and Britain supplied war materials in large
quantity through Lend Lease. There was some coordination of military
action, especially in summer 1944. At war's end the central issue was
whether Stalin would allow free elections in eastern Europe.

The aftermath of World War II
-----------------------------

### Europe

The Soviet Union emerged from World War II devastated in human and
economic terms. But militarily it was one of the two major world powers,
a position maintained for four decades through its hegemony in Eastern
Europe (*see* Eastern Bloc), military strength, involvement in many
countries through local Communist parties, and scientific research
especially into space technology and weaponry. The Union's effort to
extend its influence or control over many states and peoples resulted in
the formation of a world socialist system of states. Established in 1949
as an economic bloc of communist countries led by Moscow, the Council
for Mutual Economic Assistance (COMECON) served as a framework for
cooperation among the planned economies of the Soviet Union, its allies
in Eastern Europe and, later, Soviet allies in the Third World. The
military counterpart to the Comecon was the Warsaw Pact.

Moscow considered Eastern Europe to be a buffer zone for the forward
defense of its western borders and ensured its control of the region by
transforming the East European countries into subservient allies. Soviet
troops crushed a popular uprising and rebellion in Budapest, Hungary, in
1956 and ended insubordination by the Czechoslovak government in 1968.
In addition to military occupation and intervention, the Soviet Union
controlled Eastern European states through its ability to supply or
withhold vital natural resources.

The KGB ("Committee for State Security"), the bureau responsible for
foreign espionage and internal surveillance, was famous for its
effectiveness. A massive network of informants throughout the Soviet
Union was used to monitor dissent from official Soviet politics and
morals.

### The Middle East

#### Relations with Israel

The first source of tension in relations between Israel and the Soviet
Union occurred on February 9, 1953, when the USSR severed relations with
Israel. The USSR used a bomb incident on Soviet Legation in Tel Aviv as
an excuse to end relations and claimed that the government was
responsible. The Israeli government received this news with shock and
concern. This was the first breach in diplomatic relations that Israel
had experienced with a superpower. There is a general consensus that
Israeli charges against the Doctors' Plot and public want for
improvement for the Soviet Jews were deciding factors. Without Israel’s
fierce hostility to the false allegations of a Doctors’ Plot, the Soviet
Union most likely would not have ended relations. After the rupture,
Israel continued to speak out against the Doctor’s Plot, and
successfully attracted international attention.

`   After the death of Stalin in 1953, the Soviet Union’s foreign policy was less hostile.  The new Soviet Prime Minister, Vyacheslav Molotov, presented a new policy of openness and peacefulness. This new policy inspired Israel to initiate relations with the USSR again, on condition that Israel would no longer criticize the USSR publicly, especially regarding the Soviet Jews. Moscow began to support the Arab states in the Arab-Israeli conflict in order to use this conflict for its own confrontation with the West. `

`   On April 7, 1953 Egypt, Iraq, and Syria declared the establishment of a common federation. The destruction of Israel was their main goal.  In 1955, the USSR made an arms deal with Egypt. This angered Israel.  While Britain sided with the US and agreed to withhold further funding for the construction of Egypt's Aswan Dam in July 1956, they were also furious at the action and believed that America's withdrawal of aid had provided the opening for Soviet penetration of Egypt.  Both Britain and Israel now saw Egypt as a threat to regional stability.`

`   The Suez Crisis occurred in the fall of 1956.  At this time, Britain, France and Israel invaded Egypt, claiming that they were protecting the Suez Canal. The USSR saw this event as a threat to its security and international prestige by the West. Britain and France lost prestige when the United States opposed the invasion and forced a withdrawal. The Suez Crisis was the first clash between Israel’s security interests and the strategic interests of the USSR in the Middle East.`

`   On June 5, 1967 the Six-Day War commenced. Immediately, the Soviet Union went to the United Nations to stop the war and remove Israeli forces from the border. The USSR threatened to break off relations with Israel. The USSR never wanted a war to occur in the Middle East. By June 10, the Soviet Union threatened to intervene militarily if Israel did not stop its advance towards Syria.`

While Israel and the Soviet Union originally were working towards the
same goal, eventually, their interests became different, and the two
nations drifted apart. Israel focused on regional peace while the USSR
focused on global peace. The Soviet Union concerned itself with its own
power and domination while Israel was concerned with its own safety.
Because these two goals never coincided, the relations of the two
dissolved.

#### Relations with the Arab states

In 1955, the Egyptians made an arms deal with Czechoslovakia. This was
technically a deal between Egypt and the Soviet Union because
Czechoslovakia had Soviet arms. At this point, Egypt was neutral towards
the Soviet Union and made the deal to manipulate the United States into
giving it financial aid. The arms deal was the Soviet Union’s first step
in creating relations with other Arab states and gaining a foothold in
the Middle East for expansion and domination.

US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles was deeply suspicious of
Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser, who he believed to be a reckless
and dangerous nationalist. Following Egypt's arms deal with
Czechoslovakia, however, others in the Eisenhower administration
convinced Dulles that the American aid might pull Nasser back from his
relationship with the Soviet Union and prevent the growth of Soviet
power in the Middle East. In December 1955, Secretary Dulles announced
that the United States, together with Great Britain, was providing
nearly \$75 million in aid to Egypt to help in the construction of the
Aswan Dam on the Nile River. In response to Nasser's increasing attacks
on Western colonialism and imperialism and Egypt's continued dalliance
with the Soviet Union, Britain and the United States withdrew funds for
the Aswan Dam in July 1956. That action drove Egypt further toward an
alliance with the Soviet Union and was a contributing factor to the Suez
Crisis later in 1956. Nasser responded to the aid cut by nationalizing
the Suez Canal and the Soviets then rushed to Egypt's aid; the Aswan Dam
was officially opened in 1964.

During the 1956 Suez Crisis, the Soviet Union sided with Egypt. The USSR
viewed the nationalization of the Suez Canal as important to removing
Western influence from the Middle East. Additionally, the Soviet Union
was willing to fund Egypt because in return, it received access to
warm-water ports, which it desperately needed to spread its influence.
Though US President Dwight D. Eisenhower was also infuriated at the
invasion and had successfully brought an end to end to Suez Crisis by
pressuring the invading forces to withdraw from Egypt by early 1957, the
United States continued to maintain good relations with Britain, France
and Israel and sought to limit Soviet ally Nasser's influence, thus
damaging its relations with the Middle East for the next 35 years. By
continuing to side with Egypt, the Soviet Union gained more prestige in
the Middle East and succeeded in intimidating its superpower opponent,
the United States. Nasser's pan-Arab influence spread throughout the
Middle East and he soon gained a popular image among those who resented
Western colonialism. In spite of his alliance with the Soviet Union,
Nasser would not sign a military alliance pact with the nation, made
efforts to prevent the spread of Communism and other foreign influences
throughout the Arab region by forming a civil union with Syria known as
the United Arab Republic (UAR)—a nation which he had hoped other Arab
states would eventually join as well—in 1958 and was a founding father
of the Non-Aligned Movement in 1961; though the union with Syria
collapsed in 1961, Egypt would still be officially known as the United
Arab Republic for a while longer.

In 1966, a left-wing party in Syria gained power and intended to
cooperate with the USSR. The Soviet Union was willing to take every
effort to guarantee stability of the new regime in Syria in order to
have support from a Communist regime in the Middle East. Once this
regime gained power, the USSR’s activity in the Middle East intensified.
The USSR encouraged the new Syrian regime and admonished Israel. The
USSR wished to gain more dominance in the Middle East, so it aggravated
the Arab-Israeli conflict. However, the Soviet Union did not want a war,
so it prevented a war by pacifying Israel’s policy towards Syria. The
USSR desired to be the sole defender of the Arab world, and so did
everything in its power to increase the Arab states’ dependence.

On April 7, 1967, Syria executed terrorist attacks on Israel. The
attacks were directed at an Israeli tractor working land in the
demilitarized area on the Syrian-Israeli border. Syria and Israel
exchanged fire all day. At the end of the battle, Israel had shot down
seven Soviet-made Syrian planes. This was the first air battle between
the two nations. The USSR supported Syrian attacks and blamed the
violent acts on Israel. Syria did not hesitate to act because it
believed that the other Arab states would support it and Israel was not
capable of defeating it. In the UAR, the USSR motivated Nasser to have
the UN forces leave Sinai and Gaza Strip and to blockade the Straits of
Tiran. Like Nasser, the USSR didn’t believe that Israel would start a
war on its own. Even if Israel did attack, it was unlikely that Israel
would be capable of defeating the Arab states. Syria believed that, with
the help of the UAR, it could beat Israel. On May 11, the USSR warned
the UAR that Israel troops were gathering on the border with Syria and
that an invasion was planned for May 18 to May 22. At this time, the
USSR also began to publish accusations against Israel in order to cement
the defensive unity of the UAR and Syria.

On June 5, 1967, the Six-Day War began. During the war, the UAR asked
the Soviet Union for more arms, but the Soviet Union denied its request
because it wanted the war to end. The war ended in the defeat of the UAR
and Syria on June 10. Once the war was over, though, the Soviet Union
was satisfied with the state of the Middle East and gave weapons to the
Arabs in order to repair relations with them. For the Soviet Union,
defeat meant that its position in the Middle East was impaired and its
weapons and military training were given a poor reputation. Following
this loss, Nasser agreed to allow the Soviets to keep military bases in
the country

By 1969, Nasser had formed an alliance with Jordan's King Hussein and
started to move towards cementing peace with Israel in exchange for the
return of the Sinai Peninsula and the formation of a Palestinian state
in the Gaza Strip and West Bank. On September 28, 1970, Nasser died of a
heart attack and his vice president Anwar Sadat succeeded him. Though
Sadat sought to maintain good relations with the Soviet Union, he was
also willing to consider economic assistance from nations outside the
Arab region and the Eastern Bloc as well. In 1971, Sadat, hoping to help
the nation's economy recover from its losses in the Six-Day War,
officially changed the UAR's name back to Egypt and signed a Treaty of
Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union. In 1972, however, the
direction of Soviet-Egypt relations changed dramatically when Sadat
ordered Soviet military personnel to leave the country. Throughout the
remainder of the 1970s, Sadat developed strong relations with the
Western powers, repealed Egypt's Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation
with the Soviet Union in March 1976, made peace with Israel in March
1979 following the Camp David Accords—where it was agreed that Israel
would depart from the Sinai Peninsula in exchange for making the area a
demilitarized zone and that Egypt would not seek claims to a Palestinian
state in the Gaza Strip and West Bank in exchange for annual economic
and military aid from the United States— and distanced Egypt from the
Soviet Union. The Soviet Union now focused on building relations with
its three other principal allies in the Middle East, Syria, Iraq and the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).

In 1964, Nasser and other Arab League in Cairo Summit 1964 initiated the
creation of the PLO to represent the Palestinian people. Despite
establishing ties with the new organization, the Soviet government also
feared the PLO would weaken their influence in the Arab region and
reacted with skepticism towards the group's leadership. Following the
Six Day War, however, Soviet influence would further increase in the
Arab region and PLO would follow suite. In March 1968, Yasser Arafat and
his Fatah organization gained international attention and popularity in
the Arab region when it engaged in a full-scale battle with an Israeli
force at the city of Karameh in Jordan, where 150 Palestinians and 29
Israelis were killed. Two months later, the Fatah would join the PLO and
Arafat was appointed as the organization's Chairman. Under Arafat's
leadership, favoritism towards the USSR was firmly established within
the ranks of the PLO and the organization would frequently buy Eastern
Bloc military and equipment to carry out sporadic terrorist attacks
against Israel.

In 1972 the Soviets declared the PLO the vanguard of the Arab liberation
movement Nevertheless, the Soviets still refused to let the PLO
influence their standing in the Arab-Israeli peace process and sought to
push their own proposed resolutions before the UN Security Council. In
September 1978, however, Soviet influence over the Arab-Israeli peace
progress weakened significantly after Egypt and Israel agreed to make
peace with one another during the Camp David Accords in September 1978.
Afterwards, the Soviet President, Leonid Brezhnev, declared that “there
is only one road” to a real settlement, “the road of full liberation of
all Arab lands occupied by Israel in 1967, of full and unambiguous
respect for the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine, including
the right to create their own independent state.” At the end of Arafat's
visit to Moscow, 29 October to 1 November 1978, the Soviet authorities
finally recognized the PLO as the “sole legitimate representative of the
Palestinian people.”

Between 1958 and 1990, Soviet-Iraqi relations were very strong. The
Soviet Union established diplomatic relations with the Kingdom of Iraq
on 9 September 1944. The regime of King Faisal II was anti-communist and
only established links with Moscow due its dependence on the United
Kingdom and the Anglo–Soviet Treaty of 1942. In January 1955, the Soviet
government criticised the Iraqi government decision to join the Baghdad
Pact, which led to Iraq cutting diplomatic relations with the Soviets.
After Faisal II was overthrown in a military coup on 14 July 1958, the
newly proclaimed Republic of Iraq led by General Abd al-Karim Qasim
re-established relations with the Soviet Union, and the Soviet Union
began selling arms to Iraq. In 1967, Iraq signed an agreement with the
USSR to supply the nation with oil in exchange for large-scale access to
Eastern Bloc arms. In 1972, Iraq, by now arguably the nation's closest
Arab ally, signed a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet
Union.

Since 1966, Syria had obtained most of its military equipment from the
Soviet Union. In 1971, when Air Force Commander Hafez al-Assad became
President of Syria by way of a coup, he elected to maintain a strategic
policy of close cooperation with the Soviet Union. The same year, Assad
agreed to allow Soviet military personnel to keep a naval base in
Tartus. In February 1972, Syria signed a peace and security pact with
the Soviet Union as a means to strengthen its defense capability. During
the year, Moscow delivered more than \$135 million in Soviet arms to
Damascus. In 1980, Syria signed a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation
with the Soviet Union.

A secret protocol to the treaty reputedly detailed Soviet military
obligations to Syria and gave the USSR to power to mandate the dispatch
of Soviet troops to Syria in case of an Israeli invasion. Syrian defense
minister Tlas warned in 1984 that the Soviet Union would dispatch two
Soviet airborne divisions to Syria within eight hours in the event of a
conflict with Israel. Tlas's has also stated that the Soviet Union would
use nuclear weapons to protect Syria. Tlas's statements, however, were
not endorsed by the Soviet Union. Syrian–Soviet nuclear cooperation was
limited to a February 1983 agreement for cooperation and exchange for
peaceful purposes. In addition to the PLO, Syria and Iraq, the Soviet
Union also developed good relations with Libya, the Yemen Arab Republic
and South Yemen.

Following its independence from Britain in 1962, the Soviet Union became
one of the first nations to recognize the Yemen Arab Republic. On
December 27, 1962, two treaties for setting up a study for economic
projects and using soil and ground waters between the two countries. In
1963, the Soviet government appointed the first ambassador to Yemen Arab
Republic(YAR) in Sana'a. In September 1963, Russians finished
constructing Arrahaba International Airport. On March 21, 1964,
President of YAR Abdullah Assalal paid the first visit to Moscow. The
visit resulted in signing friendship treaty between the two countries in
addition to conducting economic and military relations.

In 1967, the Soviet Union immediately recognized South Yemen after it
gained independence from Britain. In 1969, South Yemen became the first
and only avowedly Communist nation in the Middle East. Unaccepted by
Muslim nations in the region, South Yemen relied on aid from Communist
nations and allowed the Soviets to keep naval bases in the country. In
1972, after a war broke out between the two neighboring Yemen states,
the Yemen Arab Republic and South Yemen agreed to eventually unify as
one nation. In October 1979, the Soviet Union and South Yemen officially
signed a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation. Despite the aid it now
received from the United States following a brief spat with South Yemen
between 1978 and 1979, the Yemen Arab Republic would not break with the
Soviets and later renewed its Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with
the USSR in October 1984.

Although Libya was not as firm a Soviet ally as many Third World Marxist
regimes were, Moscow developed close ties with the anti-Western regime
of Qadhafi, who had overthrown Libya's pro-Western monarchy in 1969. The
number-two Soviet leader at that time, Alexei Kosygin, went to Libya in
1975, and Qadhafi visited Moscow in 1976, 1981 and 1985. Soviet-Libyan
trade volume during the 1970s and 1980s was approximately \$100 million
per year and relations between the two accelerated between the years
1981 and 1982. During this period, Moscow also supplied \$4.6 billion in
weaponry to Libya, providing about 90 percent of that country's arms
inventory, and the Gaddafi regime assisted the Soviet Union by playing a
key role in preserving the Communist regimes in both Angola and
Ethiopia. According to Kommersant, "Libya was one of the Soviet Union's
few partners that paid in full for the military equipment it purchased
from the USSR," though the Gaddafi regime still maintained good
relations with the Western nations of France and Italy and refused to
sign a Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union.
Libya, however, did run up a debt to Moscow during those years.

Throughout much of the Cold War, Syria and Iraq were each ruled by rival
fractions of the pan-Arab Baath Party and the two nations were often
tense towards one another despite their close relations with the Soviet
Union. Their relationship, which had been lukewarm at best since 1963,
started to change in a dramatic fashion when Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the
Shah of Iran, was overthrown in February of 1979 and replaced with the
pro-Islamist regime of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. After seizing power,
Khomeini established a system of laws which required the mostly Shiite
population of Iran to follow strict adherence to the Twelver school of
thought. Assad, himself a Shiite, soon formed a strong alliance with
Iran and sought to use this new relationship to greatly weaken Israel's
hold on power. On July 16, 1979, Ahmed Hassan al Bakr, who had ruled
Iraq following a coup in 1968, stepped down from power and appointed his
cousin Saddam Hussein, a strongly anti-Shiite Sunni, to be his successor
and the Syrian government officially closed its embassy in Baghdad soon
afterwards. In 1980, relations between Iraq and Syria officially broke
apart when Syria declared its support for Iran during the Iran-Iraq War
and Hussein, hoping to gain the advantage over Iran, expanded relations
with the Western nations and recanted Iraq's previous position towards
Israel.

In December 1979, relations between the Soviet Union and Iraq, though
still very strong in private, soured greatly in public when Iraq
condemned the Soviet's invasion of Afghanistan. After Iraq successfully
invaded in September 1980, the Soviet Union, hoping to make Iran a new
ally, cut off arms shipments to Iraq (and to Iran) as part of its
efforts to induce a cease-fire. However, it also allowed Syria to
continue to back Iran and also ship Libyan and Eastern Bloc weapons to
the country as well. While Khomeini was strongly anti-American and had
demonstrated this sentiment by calling United States "the Great Satan"
and taking US embassy workers hostage, he also strongly opposed the
Soviet Union, labeling the Communist belief a threat to Islam, and
efforts by the Soviets to make Iran an ally further soured when Khomeini
openly declared support the Afghan Mujahideen during the Soviet-Afghan
War and refused to crackdown on pro-Afghan protesters who consistently
attacked the USSR embassy in Tehran. In 1982, when it became clear that
Iran would not align with the USSR after the Khomeini regime gained the
upper hand in the Iraq-Iran War and successfully invaded Iraqi
territory, the Soviets resumed regular arm shipments to Iraq, but
relations between the two nations where still politically strained and
would not become strong in public again until early 1988.

Since 1966, a large Soviet military presence developed in Syria. Syria
eventually became not only the Soviet military's most favored client in
the Middle East, but throughout the Third World as well. By mid-1984,
there were an estimated 13,000 Soviet and East European advisers in
Syria. Though relations still remained strong, the Soviets' stance
towards Syria's support for Iran changed dramatically when Iran further
advanced into Iraqi territory and drew strong ire from the Soviets as it
continued to suppress members of the pro-communist Tudeh Party of Iran.
As a result, many of the Eastern advisers were withdrawn in 1985 and
between 2,000 and 5,000 remained by 1986. In February 1986, Iran
successfully captured the Al-Faw Peninsula and the Soviet Union's stance
in the Iraq-Iran War completely shifted towards Iraq.

The Soviet Union’s foreign policy in the Middle East was contradictory.
While the USSR first supported Israel, this relationship soon
disintegrated as the Soviet Union felt threatened by Israel’s need for
security from the United States. The USSR turned to other Arab states in
order to gain influence in the Arab world and to eliminate Western
influence. The USSR viewed the Arab states as more important than Israel
because they could help the USSR achieve its goal of spreading Communist
influence. The USSR chose to support Egypt and Syria with arms in order
to demonstrate its domination. The Soviet Union manipulated the Arab
states against Israel in order to increase their dependence on the
Soviet Union and to discourage Western powers from assisting Israel. The
USSR hoped to be the only superpower influence in the Middle East.

Relations with Southeast Asian states
-------------------------------------

The Soviet Union gradually became heavily involved in the contest for
influence in Southeast Asia. Although the Soviet Union is usually
associated with its diplomatic support for North Vietnam during the
Vietnam War, it also played a significant role in other Southeast Asian
countries. Prior to the rise of President Suharto, the Soviet Union's
largest recipient of arms aid between 1958-1965 was Indonesia.

The 1970s onwards
-----------------

In the 1970s, the Soviet Union achieved rough nuclear parity with the
United States, and surpassed it by the end of that decade with the
deployment of the SS-18 missile. It perceived its own involvement as
essential to the solution of any major international problem. Meanwhile,
the Cold War gave way to *Cold War (1962-1991)\#Détente|Détente* and a
more complicated pattern of international relations in which the world
was no longer clearly split into two clearly opposed blocs. Less
powerful countries had more room to assert their independence, and the
two superpowers were partially able to recognize their common interest
in trying to check the further spread and proliferation of nuclear
weapons (*see* SALT I, SALT II, Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty).

Elsewhere the Soviet Union had concluded friendship and cooperation
treaties with a number of states in the non-communist world, especially
among Third World and Non-Aligned Movement states. Notwithstanding some
ideological obstacles, Moscow advanced state interests by gaining
military footholds in strategically important areas throughout the Third
World. Furthermore, the USSR continued to provide military aid for
revolutionary movements in the Third World. For all these reasons,
Soviet foreign policy was of major importance to the non-communist world
and helped determine the tenor of international relations.

Although myriad bureaucracies were involved in the formation and
execution of Soviet foreign policy, the major policy guidelines were
determined by the Politburo of the Communist Party. The foremost
objectives of Soviet foreign policy had been the maintenance and
enhancement of national security and the maintenance of hegemony over
Eastern Europe. Relations with the United States and Western Europe were
also of major concern to Soviet foreign policy makers and, much as with
the United States, relations with individual Third World states were at
least partly determined by the proximity of each state to the border and
to estimates of strategic significance.

Gorbachev and after
-------------------

When Mikhail Gorbachev succeeded Konstantin Chernenko as General
Secretary of the Communist Party in 1985, it signaled a dramatic change
in Soviet foreign policy. Gorbachev pursued conciliatory policies toward
the West instead of maintaining the Cold War status quo. The USSR ended
its military occupation of Afghanistan, signed strategic arms reduction
treaties with the United States, and allowed its satellite states in
Eastern Europe to determine their own affairs. Post World War II issues
about the status and borders of Germany were addressed in 1990, when the
Soviet Union, along with the USA, Britain and France, signed a treaty on
German reunification with the two German governments.

After the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia claimed to be
the legal successor to the Soviet Union on the international stage
despite its loss of superpower status. Russian foreign policy repudiated
Marxism-Leninism as a guide to action, soliciting Western support for
capitalist reforms in post-Soviet Russia.
