The **Grand Duchy of Moscow**  or **Grand Principality of Moscow**
(also known in English simply as **Muscovy**), was a late medieval Rus'
principality centered on Moscow, and the predecessor state of the early
modern Tsardom of Russia.

The Grand Duchy of Moscow expanded through conquest and annexation from
just 20,000 square kilometers in 1300 to 430,000 in 1462, 2.8 million in
1533, and 5.4 million by 1584. It is taken to originate with Daniel I
who inherited the town in 1283, eclipsing and eventually absorbing its
parent duchy of Vladimir-Suzdal by the 1320s. The power of Moscow grew
as well, destroying and annexing the Novgorod Republic in 1478 and the
Grand Duchy of Tver in 1485.

Muscovy remained tributary to the Golden Horde (the "Tatar Yoke") until
1480. Ivan III, during his 43-year reign, further consolidated the
state, campaigning against his major remaining rival power, the Grand
Duchy of Lithuania, and, by 1503, had tripled the territory of Muscovy,
adopting the title of tsar and claiming the title of "Ruler of all
Rus'". By his marriage to the niece of the last Byzantine emperor, he
established Muscovy as the successor state of the Roman Empire, the
"Third Rome".

Ivan's successor Vasili III also enjoyed military success, gaining
Smolensk from Lithuania in 1512, pushing Muscovy's borders to the Dniepr
River. Vasili's son Ivan IV (the later *Ivan the Terrible*) was an
infant at his father's death in 1533. He was crowned in 1547, assuming
the title of tsar together with the proclamation of Tsardom of Russia
.

Origin
------

When the Mongols invaded the lands of Kievan Rus', Moscow was an
insignificant trading outpost in the principality of Vladimir-Suzdal.
Though the Mongols burnt down Moscow in the winter of 1238 and pillaged
it in 1293, the outpost's remote, forested location offered some
security from Mongol attacks and occupation, and a number of rivers
provided access to the Baltic and Black Seas and to the Caucasus region.

More important to Moscow's development into what became the state of
Moscow however, was its rule by a series of princes who collaborated
with the Mongols. The first ruler of the principality of Moscow, Daniel
I (d. 1303), was the youngest son of Alexander Nevsky of
Vladimir-Suzdal. He started to expand his principality by seizing
Kolomna and securing the bequest of Pereslavl-Zalessky to his family.
Daniel's son Yuriy (also known as Georgiy) controlled the entire basin
of the Moskva River and expanded westward by conquering Mozhaisk. He
then forged an alliance with the overlord of the Rus' principalities,
Uzbeg Khan of the Golden Horde, and married the khan's sister. He was
allowed by the khan to claim the title of Grand Duke of Vladimir-Suzdal,
a position which allowed him to interfere into the affairs of the
Novgorod Republic to the north-west.

Yuriy's successor, Ivan I (r. 1325–40), managed to retain the title of
Grand Duke by cooperating closely with the Mongols and collecting
tribute and taxes from other Rus' principalities on their behalf. This
relationship enabled Ivan to gain regional ascendancy, particularly over
Moscow's chief rival, the northern city of Tver, which rebelled against
the Horde in 1327. The uprising was subdued by the joint forces of
Mongols and Muscovites. Ivan was reputed to be the richest person in
Rus', as his moniker "Kalita" (literally, the "moneybag") (Moss 2005)
testifies. He used his treasures to purchase land in other
principalities and to finance construction of stone churches in the
Kremlin. In 1327, the Orthodox Metropolitan Peter transferred his
residence from Kiev to Vladimir and then to Moscow, further enhancing
the prestige of the new principality.

Dmitri Donskoi
--------------

Ivan's successors continued gathering the lands of Rus' to increase the
population and wealth under their rule. In the process, their interests
clashed with the expanding Grand Duchy of Lithuania, whose subjects were
predominantly East Slavic and Orthodox. Grand Duke Algirdas of Lithuania
allied himself by marriage with Tver and undertook three expeditions
against Moscow (1368, 1370, 1372) but was unable to take it. The main
bone of contention between Moscow and Vilnius was the large city of
Smolensk.

In the 1350s, the country and the royal family were hit by the Black
Death. Dmitry Ivanovich was aged nine, when his parents died and the
title of Grand Duke slipped into the hands of his distant relative,
Dmitry of Suzdal. Surrounded by Lithuanians and Muslim nomads, the ruler
of Moscow cultivated an alliance with the Rus' Orthodox Church, which
experienced a resurgence in influence, due to the monastic reform of St.
Sergius of Radonezh.

Educated by Metropolitan Alexis, Dmitri posed as a champion of Orthodoxy
and managed to unite the warring principalities of Rus' in his struggle
against the Horde. He challenged the Khan's authority and defeated his
commander Mamai in the epic Battle of Kulikovo (1380). However, the
victory did not bring any short-term benefits; Tokhtamysh in 1382,
sacked Moscow hoping to reassert his vested authority over his vassal,
the Grand Prince, and his own Mongol hegemony, killing 24,000 people.

Nevertheless, Dmitri became a national hero. The memory of Kulikovo
Field made the Rus' population start believing in their ability to end
Tatar domination and become a free people. Dmitri successfully overcame
the stigma of collaborating with the Tatars which had been attached to
Moscow for decades. In 1389, he passed the throne to his son Vasily I
without bothering to obtain the Khan's sanction.

Vasily I and Vasily II
----------------------

Vasily I (r. 1389–1425) continued the policies of his father. After the
Horde was attacked by Tamerlane, he desisted from paying tribute to the
Khan, but was forced to pursue a more conciliatory policy after Edigu's
incursion on Moscow in 1408. Married to the only daughter of the Grand
Duke Vytautas of Lithuania, he attempted to avoid open conflicts with
his powerful father-in-law, even when the latter annexed Smolensk. The
peaceful years of his long reign were marked by the continuing expansion
to the east (annexation of Nizhny Novgorod and Suzdal, 1392) and to the
north (annexation of Vologda, Veliky Ustyug, and Perm of Vychegda,
1398). Nizhny Novgorod was given by the Khan as a reward for Muscovite
help against a rival.

The reforms of St. Sergius triggered a cultural revival, exemplified by
the icons and frescoes of the monk Andrei Rublev. Hundreds of
monasteries were founded by St. Sergius's disciples in distant and
inhospitable locations, including Beloozero and Solovki. Apart from
their cultural function, these monasteries were major landowners. They
could control the economy of an adjacent region. In fact they served as
outposts of Moscow influence in the neighboring principalities and
republics. Another factor responsible for the expansion of the Grand
Duchy of Moscow was its favorable dynastic situation, when each
sovereign was succeeded by his son, while rival principalities were
plagued by dynastic strife and splintered into ever smaller polities.
The only lateral branch of the House of Moscow, represented by Vladimir
of Serpukhov and his descendants, was firmly anchored to the Moscow
Duchy.

The situation changed with the ascension of Vasily I's successor, Vasily
II (r. 1425–62). Before long his uncle, Yuri of Zvenigorod, started to
advance his claims to the throne and Monomakh's Cap. A bitter family
conflict erupted and rocked the country during the whole reign. After
Yuri's death in 1432, the claims were taken up by his sons, Vasily Kosoy
and Dmitry Shemyaka, who pursued the Great Feudal War well into the
1450s. Although he was ousted from Moscow on several occasions, taken
prisoner by Olug Moxammat of Kazan, and blinded in 1446, Vasily II
eventually managed to triumph over his enemies and pass the throne to
his son. At his urging, a native bishop was elected as Metropolitan of
Moscow, which was tantamount to declaration of independence of the
Russian Orthodox Church from the Patriarch of Constantinople (1448).

Ivan III
--------

Outward expansion of the Grand Duchy in the 14th and 15th centuries was
accompanied by internal consolidation. By the 15th century, the rulers
of Moscow considered the entire Rus' territory their collective
property. Various semi-independent princes of Rurikid stock still
claimed specific territories, but Ivan III (the Great; r. 1462–1505)
forced the lesser princes to acknowledge the grand prince of Moscow and
his descendants as unquestioned rulers with control over military,
judicial, and foreign affairs.

Moscow gained full sovereignty over a significant part of the ethnically
Rus' lands by 1480, when the Tatars' Golden Horde overlordship ended
officially after the *Great standing on the Ugra river*, and by the
beginning of the 16th century virtually all those lands were united,
including the Novgorod Republic (annexation of 1478) and the Grand Duchy
of Tver (annexation of 1485). Through inheritance, Ivan was able to
control the important Principality of Ryazan, and the princes of Rostov
and Yaroslavl' subordinated themselves to him. The northwestern city of
Pskov consisting of city and few lands surrounding it remained
independent in this period, but Ivan's son, Vasili III (r. 1505–33),
later conquered it.

Having consolidated the core of Russia under his rule, Ivan III became
the first Moscow ruler to adopt the titles of tsar and *"Ruler of all
Rus'"*. Ivan competed with his powerful northwestern rival Lithuania for
control over some of the semi-independent former principalities of
Kievan Rus' in the upper Dnieper and Donets river basins. Through the
defections of some princes, border skirmishes, and a long, inconclusive
war with Lithuania that ended only in 1503, Ivan III was able to push
westward, and Moscow state tripled in size under his rule.

The reign of the Tsars started officially with Ivan the Terrible, the
first monarch to be crowned Tsar of Russia, but in practice it started
with Ivan III, who completed the centralization of the state
(traditionally known as *the gathering of the Russian lands*) at the
same time as Louis XI did the same in France.

Court
-----

The court of the Moscow princes combined ceremonies and customs
inherited from Kievan Rus with those imported from the Byzantine Empire
and Golden Horde. Some traditional Russian offices, like that of
tysyatsky and veche, were gradually abolished in order to consolidate
power in the hands of the ruling prince. A new elaborate system of court
precedence, or *mestnichestvo*, predicated the nobleman's rank and
function on the rank and function of his ancestors and other members of
his family. The highest echelon of hereditary nobles was composed of
boyars. They fell into three categories:

-   Rurikid princes of Upper Oka towns, Suzdal, Rostov, Yaroslavl, etc.
    that lived in Moscow after their hereditary principalities had been
    incorporated into Duchy of Moscow (e.g., Shuisky, Vorotynsky,
    Repnin, Romodanovsky);
-   Foreign princes from Lithuania and Golden Horde, claiming descent
    either from Grand Duke Gediminas or from Genghis Khan (e.g., Belsky,
    Mstislavsky, Galitzine, Trubetskoy);
-   Ancient families of Moscow nobility that have been recorded in the
    service of Grand Dukes from the 14th century (e.g., Romanov,
    Godunov, Sheremetev).

Rurikid and Gediminid boyars, whose fathers and grandfathers were
independent princelings, felt that they were kin to the grand prince and
hence almost equal to him. During the times of dynastic troubles (such
as the years of Ivan IV's minority), boyardom constituted an internal
force which was a permanent threat to the throne. An early form of the
monarch's conflict with boyarstvo was the *oprichnina* policy of Ivan
the Terrible.

During such conflicts, Ivan, Boris Godunov, and some later monarchs felt
the necessity to counterbalance the boyardom by creating a new kind of
nobility, based on personal devotion to tsar and merits earned by
faithful service, rather than by heredity. Later these new nobles were
called *dvoryans* (singular: dvoryanin). The name comes from the Russian
word *dvor* in the meaning of *tsar's dvor*, i.e., The Court. Hence the
expression *pozhalovat ko dvoru*, i.e., to be called to (serve) The
Court.

Assessment
----------

The development of the modern day Russian state is traced from Kievan
Rus' through Vladimir-Suzdal and Moscow Duchy to Tsardom of Russia, and
then, the Russian Empire. The Moscow Duchy drew people and wealth to the
northeastern part of Kievan Rus'; established trade links to the Baltic
Sea, the White Sea, and the Caspian Sea and to Siberia; and created a
highly centralized and autocratic political system. The political
traditions established in Muscovy, therefore, exerted a powerful
influence on the future development of Russian society.

See also
--------

-   List of Russian rulers
-   Tsardom of Russia
-   Muscovite Manorialism
-   Muscovite–Lithuanian Wars

Further reading
---------------

-   Chester Dunning - *The Russian Empire and the Grand Duchy of
    Muscovy: A Seventeenth Century French Account*
-   -   Marshall Poe, *Foreign Descriptions of Muscovy: An Analytic
    Bibliography of Primary and Secondary Sources*, Slavica Publishers,
    1995, ISBN 0-89357-262-4
-   - [Russia](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/rutoc.html)

References
----------

-   Moss, Walter G (2005). "History of Russia - Volume 1: To 1917",
    Anthem Press, p. 80

Category:1547 disestablishments Category:States and territories
established in 1263 Category:Moscow Oblast Category:Medieval Russia
Category:History of Moscow Category:Former Slavic countries
Category:Former monarchies of Europe|Moscow Category:13th century in
Russia|Moscow Category:14th century in Russia|Moscow Category:15th
century in Russia|Moscow Category:16th century in Russia|Moscow
Category:13th century in Moscow Category:14th century in Moscow
Category:15th century in Moscow Category:16th century in Moscow
