The Constitution of the Russian Federation provides all citizens right
to free healthcare under Mandatory Medical Insurance in 1996. However,
since the collapse of the Soviet Union, the health of the Russian
population has declined considerably as a result of social, economic,
and lifestyle changes. In 2008, 621,000 doctors and 1.3 million nurses
were employed in Russian healthcare. The number of doctors per 10,000
people was 43.8, but only 12.1 in rural areas. The number of general
practitioners as a share of the total number of doctors was 1.26
percent.

Life expectancy
---------------

As of 2009, the average life expectancy in Russia was 62.77 years for
males and 74.67 years for females. The average Russian life expectancy
of 68.67 years at birth is nearly 10 years shorter than the overall
average figure for the European Union, or the United States.

The biggest factor contributing to this relatively low life expectancy
for males is a high mortality rate among working-age males from
preventable causes (e.g., alcohol poisoning, stress, smoking, traffic
accidents, violent crimes). Mortality among Russian men rose by 60%
since 1991, four to five times higher than European average.

As a result of the large difference in life expectancy between men and
women, the gender imbalance remains to this day and there are 0.859
males to every female.

Major health issues
-------------------

### Common causes of death

In 2008, 1,185,993, or 57% of all deaths in Russia were caused by
cardiovascular disease. The second leading cause of death was cancer
which claimed 289,257 lives (14%). External causes of death such as
suicide (1.8%), road accidents (1.7%), murders (1.1%), accidental
alcohol poisoning (1.1%), and accidental drowning (0.5%), claimed
244,463 lives in total (11%). Other major causes of death were diseases
of the digestive system (4.3%), respiratory disease (3.8%), infectious
and parasitic diseases (1.6%), and tuberculosis (1.2%).

The infant mortality rate in 2008 was 8.5 deaths per 1,000, down from
9.6 in 2007. Since the Soviet collapse, there has been a dramatic rise
in both cases of and deaths from tuberculosis, with the disease being
particularly widespread amongst prison inmates.

### Smoking

Russia is the world leader in smoking. According to a survey reported in
2010 by Russia’s Health and Social Development Ministry, 43.9 million
adults in Russia are smokers. Among Russians aged 19 to 44 years, 7 in
10 men smoke and 4 in 10 women smoke. It is estimated that
330,000-400,000 people die in Russia each year due to smoking-related
diseases.

### Alcohol consumption

Alcohol consumption and Alcoholism are major problems in Russia. It is
estimated that Russians drink 15 litres (26 pints) of pure alcohol each
year. This number is nearly 3 times as much as it was in 1990. In Moscow
on September 24 of 2009, Russia's interior minister Rashid Nurgaliyev
cited the average intake at an estimated 18 liters a year; "In Russia,
each person, including babies, accounts for about 18 liters of spirits
per year. In the opinion of WHO experts, consumption of more than 8
liters per year poses a real threat to the health of the nation. Russia
has long exceeded this level". It has even been reported that excessive
alcohol consumption is to blame for nearly half of all premature deaths
in Russia.

A recent study blamed alcohol for more than half the deaths (52%) among
Russians aged 15 to 54 from 1990 to 2001. For the same demographic, this
compares to 4% of deaths for the rest of the world.

### HIV/AIDS

HIV/AIDS, virtually non-existent in the Soviet era, rapidly spread
following the collapse, mainly through the explosive growth of
intravenous drug use. According to a 2008 report by UNAIDS, the HIV
epidemic in Russia continues to grow, but at a slower pace than in the
late 1990s. At the end of December 2007 the number of registered HIV
cases in Russia was 416,113, with 42,770 new registered cases that year.
The actual number of people living with HIV in Russia is estimated to be
about 940,000. In 2007, 83% of HIV infections in Russia were registered
among injecting drug users, 6% among sex workers, and 5% among
prisoners. However, there is clear evidence of a significant rise in
heterosexual transmission. In 2007, 93.19% of adults and children with
advanced HIV infection were receiving antiretroviral therapy.

In April 2006, the State Council met with the Russian President to set
goals for developing a strategy for responding to AIDS; improving
coordination, through the creation of a high-level multisectoral
governmental commission on AIDS; and establishing a unified monitoring
and evaluation system. A new Federal AIDS Program for 2007 - 2011 was
also developed and adopted. Federal funding for the national AIDS
response in 2006 had increased more than twentyfold compared to 2005,
and the 2007 budget doubled that of 2006, adding to the already
substantial funds provided by the main donor organizations.

Coordination of activities in responding to AIDS remains a challenge for
Russia, despite increased efforts. In 2006, treatment for some patients
was interrupted due to delays in tender procedures and unexpected
difficulties with customs. Additionally, lack of full commitment to an
in-depth program for education on sex and drugs in schools hinders
effective prevention programs for children.

### Suicide

In 2008, suicide claimed 38,406 lives in Russia. With a rate of 27.1
suicides per 100,000 people, Russia has one of the highest suicide rates
in the world, although it has been steadily decreasing since it peaked
at around 40 per 100,000 in the mid-late 90s, including a 30% drop from
2001 to 2006. In 2007 about 22% of all suicides were committed by people
aged 40–49, and almost six times as many Russian males commit suicide
than females.

Heavy alcohol use is a significant factor in the suicide rate, with an
estimated half of all suicides a result of alcohol abuse. This is
evident by the fact that Russia's suicide rate since the mid-90s has
declined alongside per capita alcohol consumption, despite the economic
crises since then; alcohol consumption is more of a factor than economic
conditions.

History
-------

### Pre-reform health care

Pre-1990s Soviet Russia had a totally socialist model of health care
with a centralised, integrated, hierarchically organised with the
government providing free health care to all citizens. All health
personnel were state employees. Control of communicable diseases had
priority over non-communicable ones. On the whole, the Soviet system
tended to primary care, and placed much emphasis on specialist and
hospital care.

The integrated model achieved considerable success in dealing with
infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, typhoid fever and typhus. The
effectiveness of the model declined with underinvestment. Despite the
fact that the quality of care began to decline by the early 1980s,
medical care and health outcomes were on par with western standards.
Despite a doubling in the number of hospital beds and doctors per capita
between 1950 and 1980, the lack of money that had been going into health
was patently obvious. Some of the smaller hospitals had no radiology
services, and a few had inadequate heating or water. A 1989 survey found
that 20% of Russian hospitals did not have piped hot water and 3% did
not even have piped cold water. 17% lacked adequate sanitation
facilities. Every seventh hospital and polyclinic needed basic
reconstruction. Five years after the reforms described below per capita
spending on health care was still a meagre US\$158 per year (about 8
times less than the average European social models in Spain, the UK and
Finland, and 26 times that of the U.S. which spent US\$4,187 at that
time).

### Reform in 1991-1993

The new Russia has changed to a mixed model of health care with private
financing and provision running alongside state financing and provision.
Article 41 of the 1993 constitution confirmed a citizen's right to
healthcare and medical assistance free of charge. This is achieved
through compulsory medical insurance (OMS) rather than just tax funding.
This and the introduction of new free market providers was intended to
promote both efficiency and patient choice. A purchaser-provider split
was also expected to help facilitate the restructuring of care, as
resources would migrate to where there was greatest demand, reduce the
excess capacity in the hospital sector and stimulate the development of
primary care. Finally, it was intended that insurance contributions
would supplement budget revenues and thus help to maintain adequate
levels of healthcare funding.

The OECD reported that unfortunately, none of this has worked out as
planned and the reforms have in many respects made the system worse. The
population’s health has deteriorated on virtually every measure. Though
this is by no means all due to the changes in health care structures,
the reforms have proven to be woefully indequate at meeting the needs of
the nation. Private health care delivery has not managed to make much
inroads and public provision of health care still predominates.

The resulting system is overly complex and very inefficient. It has
little in common with the model envisaged by the reformers. Although
there are more than 300 private insurers and numerous public ones in the
market, real competition for patients is rare leaving most patients with
little or no effective choice of insurer, and in many places, no choice
of health care provider either. The insurance companies have failed to
develop as active, informed purchasers of health care services. Most are
passive intermediaries, making money by simply channelling funds from
regional OMS funds to healthcare providers.

### National Projects

image:Операционная. ФЦН (Тюмень) 04.JPG|thumb|right|200px|Federal Center
for Neurosurgery in Tyumen In 2006 a national project 'Health' was
launched to improve the country's healthcare system through improved
funding and healthcare infrastructure. This plan helped equip hospitals
and clinics with advanced, high-end equipment and ambulance systems,
build new medical centers, as well as launch nation-wide vaccination
programs and free health checks. The project has also been working on
developing medical technology market through initiatives to blend
healthcare and information technology. One of the focuses was made on
salary increase of medical staff working in the primary care as well as
their wider training programmes.

The project was initiated by the Russian President Vladimir Putin and
coordinated by the Presidential administration. It was mostly financed
by the federal budget. However regional and municipal levels have also
contributed a lot to the financing of the program.

### Reform in 2011

Starting 2000, there was significant growth in spending for public
healthcare and in 2006 it exceed the pre-1991 level in real terms. Also
life expectancy increased from 1991-93 levels, infant mortality rate
dropped from 18.1 in 1995 to 8.4 in 2008. Russian Prime Minister
Vladimir Putin announced a large-scale health-care reform in 2011 and
pledged to allocate more than 300 billion rubles (\$10 billion) in the
next few years to improve health care in the country. He also said that
obligatory medical insurance tax paid by companies for compulsory
medical insurance will increase from current 3.1% to 5.1% starting from
2011.

Pro-natal policy
----------------

In an effort to stem Demographics of Russia|Russia’s demographic crisis,
the government is implementing a number of programs designed to increase
the birth rate and attract more migrants to alleviate the problem. The
government has doubled monthly child support payments and offered a
one-time payment of 250,000 Rubles (around US\$10,000) to women who had
a second child since 2007.

In 2006, the Minister of Health Mikhail Zurabov and Deputy Chairman of
the State Duma Committee for Health Protection Nikolai Gerasimenko
proposed reinstating the Soviet-era tax on childlessness, which ended in
1992. So far, it has not been reinstated.

In 2007, Russia saw the highest birth rate since the collapse of the
USSR. The First Deputy PM also said about 20 billion rubles (about US\$1
billion) will be invested in new prenatal centres in Russia in
2008–2009. Immigration is increasingly seen as necessary to sustain the
country's population. By 2010, number of Russians dropped by 4.31% (4.87
million) from the year of 2000, during the period whole Russia’s
population died out just by 1.59% (from 145.17 to 142.86 million).

Structure
---------

The healthcare system follows the administrative structure of the
country and is divided into federal, regional (oblast-level) and
municipal (rayon-level) administrative levels.

### Regional level

The administrative units at this level govern regional healthcare. Prior
to the 1993 legislation establishing a mandatory medical insurance
system, regional governments had full control of regional funds for
healthcare. Following implementation of mandatory medical insurance,
they lost a portion of this control to the newly established territorial
mandatory medical insurance funds (OMS Funds). Due to the only partial
implementation of the health insurance system, however, regional and
local governments currently retain a significant role in its management.
The regions must ensure compliance with federal programs, in particular
those focused on the control of conditions and infectious diseases
defined as being of high social priority, but do not have to report to
the Ministry of Health. Following decentralization in the early to
mid-1990s, they enjoy considerable autonomy within their administrative
units.

### Local (municipal) level

In many larger cities rayon authorities appear to be actively engaged in
the reform process, while in rural areas the health authorities’
functions have tended to become the responsibility of central district
hospital chiefs. Following the 2003 law On general principles of
organization of local self-government in the Russian Federation,
municipal level governments do not have to report to the federal or
oblast level governments, though they do have to comply with Ministry
orders. This poses a problem for health policy since raions do not have
to comply with oblast level health reforms or other policies, and are
only obliged to provide statutory healthcare services within their
jurisdiction. In practice, many regions and raions have developed a
negotiating procedure so that the local governments remain within the
regional Ministry of Health sphere of influence.

Voluntary medical insurance
---------------------------

Voluntary medical insurance was first authorized in Russia in 1991, with
further regulatory legislation the following years. DMS is provided to
individuals or groups, for example the staff of an enterprise, and
allows the population covered to obtain additional services beyond those
included in the basic package. It is offered exclusively by private
insurance companies which operate for profit. According to the Federal
law on mandatory medical insurance legislation (1993), DMS may be
offered by private insurers who are part of the mandatory medical
insurance system. In general, it tends to be purchased mostly by
employers for their staff. The legal person purchases policies for its
employees that give the right for getting medical aid in established
public or private institution in the volume that is foreseen in the
insurance contract. Private insurance firms have tended to concentrate
on the top end of the market and to offer add-on services to supplement
the basic package of free medical care. Their focus has been on
providing better conditions, offering patient choice of a doctor and on
securing access to more prestigious institutions.
