In Russia, the largest country in the world, its geography of N.-S.
rivers and E.-W. commerce made it very suited to develop railroads as
its basic mode of transportation. Railroad traffic in the Russian Empire
(before 1917) was weak compared to the size of the country, but it
boomed under the Soviet Union (1917 to 1991) only to decline after the
Soviet Union fell apart, with the Russian Federation being its principal
inheritor.

The Soviets modernized the rail system by electrification, building new
lines and double-tracking, installing automatic couplers, brakes, and
signalling, and founding Railway Universities. Soviet Railways became in
some aspects (such as freight traffic, electrification, profitability
and railway education), superior to all other railroad systems in the
world.

Today Russian Railways, a state-owned railway company, is one of the
biggest railway companies in the world with 0.95 million employees and a
monopoly within Russia. The total length of line used by the Russian
Railways is, at, one of the largest in the world, exceeded only by the
United States.

Economic history
----------------

### Government ownership

The first initiative in developing railways came following a meeting
called by Tsar Nicholas I held on 13 January, 1842 where he announced
that the state would build the St Petersburg-Moscow railway. This
decision came about after seven years of consideration. With
characteristic slowness in committing himself, Nicholas I nevertheless
proceeded with determination, aiming to overcome problems relating to
having his capital some distance from the centre of his empire. Built in
addition to the roads and canals that previous generation had built to
link the two cities, Nicholas I envisaged that the railway would provide
a more reliable method of transport particularly during the climatic
extremes of summer and winter. Although influenced by military
considerations, the railway would help bring food grown in the South to
the less fertile northern areas. The plan for this first railway also
offered the possibility of creating a network which could extend to the
Lower Volga and the Black Sea, developing Moscow as a railway hub
similar to Chicago in the USA.

Due in part to the poor financial state of the Tsarist government and
their inability to finance railroad construction, by the early 1880s all
railroads were private companies. But then as private railroads got into
financial difficultly, the government took over some of them, resulting
in mixed system of private and government railways. However, the
government had guaranteed payment of interest and dividends on the
securities of the private railroads resulting in a strong incentive for
government takeover of failing railroads.

The government was able to turn around some money-losing railroads and
make them profitable. The remaining private companies had strong
incentive towards more efficient operation in order to avoid
nationalization. The result, according to one observer was that:
"Russian railroads gradually become perhaps the most economically
operated railroads of the world.". Profits were high: over 100 million
gold rubles a year to the government (exact amount unknown due to
accounting defects).

After the Russian Revolution (1917) all railroads become government
owned by the Soviet Union. During the earlier years, the Soviet
railroads were financially in the red, but by 1965 they returned a
profit to the Soviet Government of 13.3% on their capital investment. By
1980 profits had nearly halved to 7.1%.

### Subsidy to passengers

Passenger travel on Soviet and Russian railways has long been subsidized
by profits from freight transportation. In 2000 (post-Soviet), long
distance passengers only paid 55% of the cost while commuter train
passengers paid only 15% of costs. But 6 years later (2006) these
figures were about 80% and 50% due mainly to increased fares. Current
policy (2010) is to eliminate such subsidy and thus commuter fares have
drastically increased. As a result of this plus the economic crisis,
commuter passengers have decreased and many trains have been removed
from service. Another problem is that it's estimated that over 1/3 of
passengers cheat and pay no fare at all (including bribing the ticket
inspector).

Freight traffic: growth and decline
-----------------------------------

### Imperial period: ton-km

In 1916, just at the start of First World War (during which Germany
invaded Russia) freight traffic on Russian Railway reached nearly 100
billion tonne-kilometers (traffic on United States railways was about
five times higher). But due to the war, a few years later Russian
traffic had crashed to about 20 billion ton-km. Then the civil war
started with the reds fighting the whites, which delayed the recovery of
rail traffic. The reds (communists) won, resulting in the formation of
the Soviet Union (USSR) and a new chapter in railway development.

### Soviet period: ton-km

The USSR rebuilt its rail system and industrialized with five-year
plans. As a result, railroad freight grew about 20 times from 20 to 400
billion tonne-km by 1941. But then disaster struck again: World War II
in 1941 when Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union. In the first year or
so of the war, traffic plummeted to about half its prewar value. But
then the USSR started restoring and constructing railroads during
wartime so that by the end of the war about half of the lost traffic had
been recovered. After the war was over it took a few more years to
restore the railroads and get back to the pre-war level of traffic.

Then the USSR embarked on a series of more five-year plans and rail
traffic rapidly increased. By 1954 their rail freight traffic (about 850
billion tonne-km) surpassed that of the United States and the USSR then
hauled more rail freight than any other country in the world. Rail
freight continued to rapidly increase in the USSR so that by 1960 the
USSR was hauling about half of all railroad freight in the world (in
tonne-km) and they did this on a rail system consisting of only 10% of
the world's railway kilometrage. The status of hauling half the world's
rail freight continued for almost 30 years but in 1988 rail freight
traffic peaked at 3852 billion tonne-km (nearly 4 trillion). And then, a
few years later in 1991, the Soviet Union fell apart and its largest
republic, the Russian Federation, which then hauled about 2/3 of the
traffic of the former USSR, became an independent country.

For the USSR in 1989 (shortly before the collapse), the railroads hauled
nearly eight times as much ton-km of freight by rail as they did by
highway truck. For the US, it was only 1.5 times as much by rail. Thus
trucks in the USSR played a far lesser role in hauling freight than they
did in the US, leaving the railroad as the basic means of freight
transportation. In 1991 a law was passed which declared that railroads
were the basic transportation system of the USSR.

### Russian Federation: ton-km

Prior to 1990, traffic in the Russian Republic (of the USSR) was about
2/3 of what was hauled by the USSR (since all the other former republics
of the USSR hauled about 1/3 of the rail freight of the USSR). This
amounted to significantly more rail freight than any country in the
world. However the severe depression in Russia in the 1990s after the
collapse of the Soviet Union (actually beginning in the last year of its
existence), resulted in rail freight falling to about 40% of its 1988
value to its low point in 1997 (1020 billion ton-km).

Russia was no longer number one for rail freight. In 1993 Russia was
overtaken by the United States and the next year, 1994, it was overtaken
by China So for rail freight, Russia had fallen from a strong first
place to third and remains so to this day even though there was partial
recovery to 2116 ton-km by 2008 which is still well below the peak of
2606 ton-km in 1998. For a graph ('til 2002) see.

By 2010 there was reported to be a growing share of railroad freight
being diverted to highway trucks.

General history
---------------

### Russian Empire (1837–1917)

In the early 1830s Russian inventors father and son Cherepanovs built
the first Russian steam locomotive. The first railway line was built in
Russia in 1837 between Saint-Petersburg and Tsarskoye Selo. It was 17 km
long and linked the Imperial Palaces at Tsarskoye Selo and Pavlovsk.
Track gauge was 6 feet (1830 mm). This railway has been described as a
"toy" railway, as it had no economic, political or social impact on the
Russian Empire.

The Department of Railways, later part of the Russian Ministry of
Communications, was created in the Russian Empire in 1842 in order to
oversee the construction of Russia's first major railway line, the
Moscow–Saint Petersburg Railway. The railway linked the imperial capital
Saint-Petersburg and Moscow and was built between 1842 and 1851. Track
gauge was 5 feet (1524 mm) and this became the Russian standard gauge.

  Year   Miles of track
  ------ ----------------
  1838   16
  1855   570
  1880   14,208
  1890   19,011
  1905   31,623

On 15 June 1865, an edict of Alexander II established the Ministry of
Communications, which absorbed the Department of Railways. In the 1860s
and 1870s, Pavel Melnikov, Russia’s first Minister of Communications,
played a key role in the expansion of the railway network throughout
European Russia.

In the 1880s and 1890s, the Trans-Caspian railway connected Russian
Empire's Central Asian provinces (now, independent states of
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) with the Caspian port of Krasnovodsk; by
1906, Central Asia was directly connected by the Trans-Aral Railway with
European Russia via Kazahstan. The Trans-Siberian Railway connecting
European Russia with the Russian Far East provinces on the Sea of Japan
was built between 1891 and 1916. The Russian-built system included the
Chinese Eastern Railway, short-cutting across China's Manchuria; later
on, its southern branch was connected with other Chinese railways.
During the First World War and especially the Russian Civil War more
than 60% of the Russian railway network and more than 80% of the
carriages and locomotives were destroyed. With the German and Turkish
blockade of the Russian Baltic and Black Sea ports, the Trans-Siberian
Railway acquired a new significance as the lifeline connecting Russian
Empire to its World War I allies. To provide a shorter connection to the
Entente powers, a railway was constructed to the newly built Arctic
ice-free port of Murmansk as well (1916).

During World War I Russia used a mix of light and heavy armoured trains.
The heavy trains mounted 4.2 inch or 6 inch guns while the light trains
were equipped with 76.2mm guns.

### Soviet Russia (1917–1922)

The railways and railway workers played a major role during the Russian
Revolution. For example the Tashkent Soviet was founded on 2 March 1917
by thirty five railway workers. The Transcaspian Government was founded
by Menshevik and Social revolutionary railway workers in revolt against
the Bolsheviks who ran the Tashkent Soviet and existed from July 1918 to
July 1919.

Tsektran (Central Administrative Body of Railways) was established in
September 1920 as a fusion of the Commissariat of Transport, the Railway
unions and the relevant political departments of the Bolshevik Party.
Trotsky was put in charge.

Leon Trotsky spent much of the Russian Civil War on board his armoured
train:

:   "During the most strenuous years of the revolution, my own personal
    life was bound up inseparably with the life of that train. The
    train, on the other hand, was inseparably bound up with the life of
    the Red Army. The train linked the front with the base, solved
    urgent problems on the spot, educated, appealed, supplied, rewarded,
    and punished ..."

### Railways in the Soviet Union (1922–1991)

Image:Russian Class U locomotive Number U127.JPG|thumb|right| Russian
locomotive class U - U-127 Lenin's 4-6-0 oil burning compound
locomotive, currently preserved at the Museum of the Moscow Railway at
Paveletsky Rail Terminal

After the foundation of the Soviet Union the People's Commissariat of
Railways (after 1946 named the Ministry of Railways ) expanded the
railway network to a total length of 106,100 km by 1940. A notable
project of the late 1920s and one of the centerpieces of the First
Five-Year Plan was the Turkestan–Siberia Railway, linking Western
Siberia via Eastern Kazakhstan with Uzbekistan.

During the Great Patriotic War (World War II) the railway system played
a vital role in the war effort transporting military personnel,
equipment and freight to the frontlines and often evacuating entire
factories and towns from European Russia to the Ural region and Siberia.
The loss of mining and industrial centers of the western Soviet Union
necessitated speedy construction of new railways during the wartime.
Particularly notable among them was the railway to the Arctic coal mines
of Vorkuta, extended after the war to Labytnangi on the Ob River;
construction work to extend it all the way to the Yenisey continued into
the 1950s, aborted with the death of Joseph Stalin.

As a result of the World War II victory over Japan, the southern half of
Sakhalin Island was returned to Russia in 1945. The 1067 mm railway
network built by the Japanese during their forty years of control of
Southern Sakhalin now became part of Soviet Railways as well (as a
separate Sakhalin Railway), the only rail system within USSR (or today's
Russia).

After the war the Soviet railway network was re-built and further
expanded to more than 145,000 km of track by major additions such as
Baikal Amur Mainline.

#### Electrification

As compared to the U.S., the Soviet Union got off to a very slow start
in electrification but later greatly surpassed the US. Electrification
in the US reached its maximum in the late 1930s which is just when
electrification was getting its start in the USSR.

### Russian Federation (1991 to present day)

Following the Collapse of the Soviet Union its railway system broke up
into national railway systems of various former Soviet republics. Due to
the ensuing depression, Russian \#Russian Federation: ton-km|freight
traffic fell by 60% and has (as of 2010) not yet fully recovered.

In 2003 a vast structural reform was implemented in order to preserve
the unity of the railway network and separate the functions of state
regulation from operational management: On 18 September 2003, Decree
№585 of the Russian Government established the Russian Railways Public
Corporation with state holds 100% of the shares.

The Cape gauge railway system of Sakhalin is being re-gauged to 1520 mm.

The current CEO of the company is Vladimir Yakunin. There are plans for
partial privatization of the company in the future in order to raise
much needed capital from the sale of shares. In 2009, Russian Railways
stated that it expected a loss of 49.7 billion rubles in the year,
compared with a profit of 13.4 billion rubles in 2008, and that it
planned to shed 53,700 jobs from its workforce of 1.2 million.

In 2007, as part of a liberalisation process, Russian Railways
established First Freight Company which holds a large number of freight
wagons; in 2010, it was announced that Second Freight Company would be
established, and remaining freight wagons transferred to that.

In July 2010, RZD signed an agreement for Siemens to provide rolling
stock (240 EMUs) and upgrade 22 marshalling yards.

Notable people associated with the Russian Railways
---------------------------------------------------

-   Fyodor Funtikov, President of the Transcaspian Government
-   Leon Trotsky, People's Commissar of Army and Navy Affairs

