**Ivan III Vasilyevich**  (22 January 1440, Moscow – 27 October 1505,
Moscow), also known as **Ivan the Great**, was a Grand Prince of Moscow
and Grand Prince of all Rus (Великий князь всея Руси). Sometimes
referred to as the "gatherer of the Russian lands", he tripled the
territory of his state, ended the dominance of the Golden Horde over the
Rus, renovated the Moscow Kremlin, and laid the foundations of the
Russian state. He was one of the longest-reigning Russian rulers in
history.

Gathering of Russian lands
--------------------------

His first enterprise was a war with the Republic of Novgorod, which had
fought a series of wars (stretching back to at least the reign of Dmitry
Donskoi) for two reasons: over Moscow's religious and political
sovereignty, and over Moscow's efforts to seize land in the Northern
Dvina region. Alarmed at Moscow's growing power, Novgorod had negotiated
with Lithuania in the hope of placing itself under the protection of
Casimir IV, King of Poland and Grand Prince of Lithuania, a would-be
alliance regarded by Moscow as an act of apostasy from orthodoxy. Ivan
took the field against Novgorod in 1470, and after his generals had
twice defeated the forces of the republic—at the Battle of Shelon River
and on the Northern Dvina, both in the summer of 1471—the Novgorodians
were forced to sue for peace, agreeing to abandon their overtures to
Lithuania and ceding a considerable portion of their northern
territories, and paying a war indemnity of 15,500 roubles.

Ivan visited Novgorod Central several times in the next several years,
persecuting a number of pro-Lithuanian boyars and confiscating their
lands. In 1477, two Novgorodian envoys, claiming to have been sent by
the archbishops and the entire city, addressed Ivan in public audience
as *Gosudar* (sovereign) instead of the usual *Gospodin* (sir). Ivan at
once seized upon this as a recognition of his sovereignty, and when the
Novgorodians repudiated the envoys (indeed, one was killed at the veche
and several others of the pro-Moscow faction were killed with him) and
swore openly in front of the Moscow ambassadors that they would turn to
Lithuania again, he marched against them. Deserted by Casimir IV and
surrounded on every side by the Moscow armies, which occupied the major
monasteries around the city, Novgorod ultimately recognized Ivan's
direct rule over the city and its vast hinterland in a document signed
and sealed by Archbishop Feofil of Novgorod (1470–1480) on 15 January
1478.

Ivan dispossessed Novgorod of over four-fifths of its land, keeping half
for himself and giving the other half to his allies. Subsequent revolts
(1479–1488) were punished by the removal en masse of the richest and
most ancient families of Novgorod to Moscow, Vyatka, and other central
Russian cities. Archbishop Feofil, too, was removed to Moscow for
plotting against the Grand Prince. The rival republic of Pskov owed the
continuance of its own political existence to the readiness with which
it assisted Ivan against its ancient enemy. The other principalities
were eventually absorbed, be it by conquest, purchase or marriage
contract: The Yaroslavl in 1463, Rostov was bought in 1474, Tver in
1485, and Vyatka 1489.

Ivan's refusal to share his conquests with his brothers, and his
subsequent interference with the internal politics of their inherited
principalities, involved him in several wars with them, from which,
though the princes were assisted by Lithuania, he emerged victorious.
Finally, Ivan's new rule of government, formally set forth in his last
will to the effect that the domains of all his kinsfolk, after their
deaths, should pass directly to the reigning Grand Duke instead of
reverting, as hitherto, to the princes' heirs, put an end once and for
all to these semi-independent princelings.

Ivan had four brothers. The eldest, Iurii, died childless on 12
September 1472. He only had a draft of a will which said nothing about
his land. Ivan seized the land, much to the surviving brothers' fury. He
placated them with some land. Boris and Andrei the Elder signed treaties
with Vasily in February and September 1473. They agreed to protect each
other's land and not have secret dealings with foreign states. They
broke this clause in 1480, fleeing to Lithuania. It is unknown if Andrei
the Younger signed a treaty. He died in 1481, leaving his lands to Ivan.
In 1491 Andrei the Elder was arrested by Ivan for refusing to aid the
Crimean Tatars against the Golden Horde. He died in prison in 1493, and
Ivan seized his land. In 1494 Boris, the only brother able to pass his
land to his sons, died. However, their land reverted to the Tsar upon
their deaths in 1503 and 1515 respectively.

There was one semi-autonomous prince in Muscovy when Ivan acceded:
Prince Mikhail Andreevich of Vereia, who had been awarded an Appanage by
Vasily II. In 1478 he was pressured into giving Belozersk to Ivan, who
got all of Mikhail's land on his death in 1486.

Domestic policy
---------------

The character of the government of Moscow under Ivan III changed
essentially, taking on a new autocratic form. This was due not merely to
the natural consequence of the hegemony of Moscow over the other Russian
lands, but to new imperial pretensions. After the fall of
Constantinople, orthodox canonists were inclined to regard the Grand
Princes of Moscow as the successors of the Byzantine emperors. Ivan
himself appeared to welcome the idea, and he began to style himself tsar
in foreign correspondence. Fennell emphasizes Ivan's success in
centralizing control over local rulers. However Fennell adds that his
reign was also "a period of cultural depression and spiritual
barrenness. Freedom was stamped out within the Russian lands. By his
bigoted anti-Catholicism Ivan brought down the curtain between Russia
and the west. For the sake of territorial aggrandizement he deprived his
country of the fruits of Western learning and civilization."

This movement coincided with a change in the family circumstances of
Ivan III. After the death of his first consort, Maria of Tver (1467),
and at the suggestion of Pope Paul II (1469), who hoped thereby to bind
Russia to the Holy See, Ivan III wedded Sophia Paleologue (also known
under her original Greek and Orthodox name of Zoe), daughter of Thomas
Palaeologus, despot of Morea, who claimed the throne of Constantinople
as the brother of Constantine XI, the last Byzantine emperor.
Frustrating the Pope's hopes of reuniting the two faiths, the princess
endorsed Orthodoxy. Due to her family traditions, she encouraged
imperial ideas in the mind of her consort. It was through her influence
that the ceremonious etiquette of Constantinople (along with the
imperial double-headed eagle and all that it implied) was adopted by the
court of Moscow.

Image:Palais à facettes.jpg|thumb|left|270px|The Palace of Facets
(1487–91) was commissioned by Ivan to Italian architects. Ivan's son
with Maria of Tver, Ivan the Young, died in 1490, leaving from his
marriage with Helen of Moldavia an only child, Dmitry the Grandson. The
latter was crowned as successor by his grandfather on 15 February 1491,
but later Ivan reverted his decision in favor of Sophia's elder son
Vasily, who was ultimately crowned co-regent with his father (14 April
1502). The decision was dictated by the crisis connected with the Sect
of Skhariya the Jew, as well as by the imperial prestige of Sophia's
descendants. Dmitry the Grandson was put into prison, where he died,
unmarried and childless, in 1509, already under the rule of his uncle.
Image:Dormition (Kremlin).JPG|thumb|The Assumption Cathedral by
Fioravanti laid claim to be the mother church of All Rus.

The Grand Duke increasingly held aloof from his boyars. The old
patriarchal systems of government vanished. The boyars were no longer
consulted on affairs of state. The sovereign became sacrosanct, while
the boyars were reduced to dependency on the will of the sovereign. The
boyars naturally resented this revolution and struggled against it.

It was in the reign of Ivan III that the new Russian Sudebnik, or law
code, was compiled by the scribe Vladimir Gusev. Ivan did his utmost to
make his capital a worthy successor to Constantinople, and with that
object invited many foreign masters and artificers to settle in Moscow.
The most noted of these was the Italian Ridolfo di Fioravante, nicknamed
"Aristotle" because of his extraordinary knowledge, who built several
cathedrals and palaces in the Kremlin, and also supervised the
construction of the Kremlin walls.

Foreign policy
--------------

Image:ivan vs khan.jpg|thumb|270px|*Ivan III tearing the khan's letter
to pieces*, an apocryphal 19th-century painting by Alexey Kivshenko It
was in the reign of Ivan III that Muscovy rejected the Tatar yoke. In
1476 Ivan refused to pay the customary tribute to the grand Khan Ahmed.
All through the autumn the Muscovy and Tatar hosts confronted each other
on opposite sides of the Ugra, till the 11th of November 1480, when
Ahmed retreated into the steppe.

In the following year the Grand Khan, while preparing a second
expedition against Moscow, was suddenly attacked, routed and slain by
Ivak, the Khan of the Nogay Horde, whereupon the Golden Horde suddenly
fell to pieces. In 1487 Ivan reduced the khanate of Kazan, one of the
offshoots of the Horde, to the condition of a vassal-state, though in
his later years it broke away from his suzerainty. With the other Muslim
powers, the Khan of the Crimean Khanate and the sultans of Ottoman
Empire, Ivan's relations were peaceful and even amicable. The Crimean
Khan, Meñli I Giray, helped him against the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and
facilitated the opening of diplomatic relations between Moscow and
Istanbul, where the first Muscovian embassy appeared in 1495.

It was during Ivan’s reign that the Christian rulers in the Caucasus
began to see the Russian monarchs as their natural allies against the
Muslim regional powers. The first attempt at forging an alliance was
made by Alexander I, king of a small Georgian kingdom of Kakheti, who
dispatched two embassies, in 1483 and 1491, to Moscow. However, as the
Russians were still too far from the Caucasus, neither of these missions
had any effect on the course of events in the region. From Matthias
Corvinus of Hungary, gun-founders, gold- and silversmiths and (Italian)
master builders were requested by Ivan.

In Nordic affairs, Ivan III concluded an offensive alliance with Hans of
Denmark and maintained regular correspondence with Emperor Maximilian I,
who called him a "brother". He built a strong citadel in Ingria named
Ivangorod after himself, situated on the Russian-Estonian border,
opposite the fortress of Narva held by the Livonian Confederation. In
the Russo-Swedish War (1495–1497) Ivan III unsuccessfully attempted to
conquer Viborg from Sweden but this attempt was checked by the Swedish
garrison in Viborg Castle led by Lord Knut Posse.

The further extension of the Moscow dominion was facilitated by the
death of Casimir IV in 1492, when Poland and Lithuania once again parted
company. The throne of Lithuania was now occupied by Casimir's son
Alexander, a weak and lethargic prince so incapable of defending his
possessions against the persistent attacks of the Russians that he
attempted to save them by a matrimonial compact, and wedded Helena,
Ivan's daughter. But the clear determination of Ivan to appropriate as
much of Lithuania as possible, finally compelled Alexander to take up
arms against his father-in-law in 1499. The Lithuanians were routed at
Vedrosha (14 July 1500), and in 1503 Alexander was glad to purchase
peace by ceding to Ivan Chernigov, Starodub, Novgorod-Seversky and
sixteen other towns.

-   Much information on Ivan III and his court is contained in Sigismund
    von Herberstein's *Rerum Moscoviticarum Commentarii* (1549).

Legacy
------

Fennell, the leading British biographer, concludes that his reign was
"militarily glorious and economically sound," and especially points to
his territorial annexations and his centralized control over local
rulers. However Fennell adds that his reign was also "a period of
cultural depression and spiritual barrenness. Freedom was stamped out
within the Russian lands. By his bigoted anti-Catholicism Ivan brought
down the curtain between Russia and the west. For the sake of
territorial aggrandizement he deprived his country of the fruits of
Western learning and civilization."

Timeline
--------

-   **1462** – Becomes Great Prince after his father's death
-   **1463** – Annexes Yaroslavl
-   **1465** – Sends an expedition to the Arctic
-   **1471** – Invades Novgorod, which becomes a puppet state
-   **1472** – Eldest brother, Yuri, died childless; Ivan seizes his
    land
-   **1474** – Buys Rostov
-   **1476** – Refuses to pay tribute to Khan Ahmed of the Golden Horde
-   **1478** – Annexes the Republic of Novgorod
-   **1480** – Golden Horde advances to the Ugra River but retreats (the
    last attempt to force Muscovy to pay tribute)
-   **1481** – Younger brother Andrei dies, leaving Ivan his land
-   **1483** – 1st Georgian emissary
-   **1484** – 1st purge of Novgorod
-   **1485** – Annexes Tver. The official date of revival of statehood;
    an acceptation of new title – 'Grand Prince of All Russia'
-   **1486** – The only autonomous Muscovite prince, Mikhail Andreevich
    of Vereia dies; Ivan seizes his land.
-   **1487** – Kazan Khanate becomes a Muscovite puppet state

:   
    :   2nd purge of Novgorod

-   **1489** – Annexes Republic of Vyatka

:   
    :   3rd purge of Novgorod: 1,000 expelled.

-   **1491** – Ivan's elder brother Andrei imprisoned for not helping
    the Crimean Khanate against the Golden Horde

:   
    :   2nd Georgian emissary

-   **1492** – War with Lithuania started August
-   **1493** – Andrei the Elder dies in prison; Ivan seizes his land
-   **1494** – Last brother, Boris, dies and leaves his land to his
    sons, Ivan and Fedor

:   
    :   February – Lithuanian war ends
        :   
            :   Muscovy annexes Vyazma and a sizable region in the upper
                reaches of the Oka River

-   **1499** – Lithuania invaded. 4,000 troops cross the Pechora River,
    take 1,000 prisoners, pelts and found Pustozyorsk.
-   **1503** – Ivan takes the land of his nephew Ivan on the latter's
    death

:   
    :   Chernigov, Starodub, Novgorod-Seversky, and sixteen other towns
        ceded by Lithuania to Muscovy, ending the war

-   **1505** – Ivan dies, leaving Muscovy to his son Vasili

Ancestry
--------

<center>
</center>

