The **Judiciary of Russia** interprets and applies the law of Russia. It
is defined under the Constitution and law with a hierarchical structure
with the Constitutional Court, Supreme Court, and Supreme Court of
Arbitration at the apex. The district courts are the primary criminal
trial courts, and the regional courts are the primary appellate courts.
The judiciary is governed by the All-Russian Congress of Judges and its
Council of Judges, and its management is aided by the Judicial
Department of the Supreme Court, the Judicial Qualification Collegia,
the Ministry of Justice, and the various courts' chairpersons. And
although there are many officers of the court, including jurors, the
Prosecutor General remains the most powerful component of the Russian
judicial system.

The judiciary faces many problems and a widespread lack of confidence
but has also made much progress in recent times. There have been serious
violations of the accepted separation of powers doctrine, systematic
attempts to undermine jury trials, problems with access to justice,
problems with court infrastructure and financial support, and
corruption. But the judiciary has also seen a fairer and more efficient
administration, a strengthening of the rule of law, moves towards a more
adversarial system, and increased utilization of the justice system.

Courts
------

Russia has a trifurcated court system, with constitutional, ordinary,
and commercial courts. The Constitutional Court of Russia is considered
a separate, independent court. The district courts are the primary
criminal trial courts, and the regional courts are the primary appellate
courts.

The ordinary courts have a four-tiered hierarchy and are responsible for
civil and criminal cases:

-   the Supreme Court of Russia,
-   regional courts,
-   district courts, and
-   magistrate courts.

The commercial courts consist of the:

-   Supreme Court of Arbitration of Russia, and
-   commercial arbitration courts.

In 1995, the courts sentenced about 1 million people for criminal
offenses, and considered 3 million administrative offenses and 2.5
million civil cases.

### Constitutional Court

The Constitutional Court of Russia  is responsible for cases
concerning conformity with the Constitution, judicial disputes between 2
or more federal bodies, between a federal body and a member of the
Federation, and between members of the Federation. As such, it practices
"constitutional review" (as differentiated from judicial review) and
decides whether federal laws, presidential decrees and directives, and
local constitutions, charters, and laws comply with the federal
constitution, as well as treaties between the national government and a
regional governments and between regional governments.

It is composed of 19 judges, and may sit in plenary sessions but is
otherwise divided into 2 chambers. The Constitutional Court consists of
two chambers with 10 and 9 judges respectively. The Chairman presides
over one of the chambers, the Deputy Chairman presides over the other
chamber.

Constitutionality of laws, disputes concerning competence of
governmental agencies, impeachment of the President of Russia, and
Constitutional Court's proposals of legislation must be dealt with by
the plenary session. The Constitutional Court may also submit to the
plenary session any other issue at its discretion.

In general, the court hears cases referred by the President, the
Federation Council, the State Duma, one-fifth of the members of either
chamber of the Federal Assembly, the Government, the Supreme Court, or
other bodies of legislative or executive authority. It also hears
complains by citizens of allegations of constitutional rights
violations.

### Supreme Court

The Supreme Court of Russia  is the highest court, and supervises
inferior courts of general jurisdiction. It occasionally sits as a court
of first instance in cases where important interests of state are at
issue; in this case it normally consists of a judge and a jury, but
occasionally consists of three judges.

There are 115 members of the Supreme Court. At plenary sessions the
Supreme Court studies the judicial decisions of lower courts on various
topics and adopts resolutions, which establish recommendations on the
interpretation of particular provisions of law for lower courts for
uniform application.

The Presidium of the Russian Supreme Court  represents Russia's final
court of appeal. The Presidium consists of thirteen judges: the Chairman
of the Supreme Court, its first deputy chairman, its six deputy chairmen
and five other Supreme Court judges. Only the Prosecutor General has the
right to appeal to the Presidium, and as a result, very few criminal
cases reviewed by the three-judge panels of the Supreme Court make it to
the Presidium. Only 0.4% of criminal cases in 1998 ended with an
acquittal in the Presidium.

The court is divided into several chambers or collegia, and each
chamber normally sits with three judges:

-   civil ;
-   criminal ;
-   military ;
-   administrative ; and
-   appeals (; formerly the cassation panel or ), which can review
    decisions of the other chambers.

There are several entities attached to the Supreme Court. The Academic
Consultative Council  assists the court in various legal and academic
matters and comprises members of the Supreme Court itself, academics,
practicing lawyers, and law enforcement officers. The members of the
Academic Consultative Council are elected at plenary sessions of the
Supreme Court. The Judicial Department is responsible for administration
of the courts.

### Regional courts

Regional courts (also called '''' courts and city courts) are the courts
at the regional level, though are not all named as such. This includes
the supreme courts of the Republics of Russia, courts of the krais
(territories; or '''' courts), courts of the oblasts (regions; ), city
courts of the federal cities of Russia (Moscow and Saint Petersburg),
courts of the autonomous oblasts, and courts of the autonomous okrugs.

The courts sit as both courts of first instance and appellate courts. As
courts of first instance, they hear more complex civil cases and serious
criminal cases. A judge and a jury, or alternatively 3 judges, hear
these cases. As appellate courts, they hear decisions of district courts
that have not yet entered into force, and consist of 3 judges.

### District courts

Image:Канашский Суд.jpg|thumb|Kanashsky District Court in Chuvashia.

District courts ( or ; also called '''' or '''' courts), which were
called People's Courts until 1996, are primarily courts of first
instance but sometimes hear appeals from magistrate courts. They are
formed in areas ( or ''''), urban areas, and cities . Decisions of
the court are appealed to the regional court.

As courts of first instance, they handle criminal cases where
imprisonment is for more than 3 years, and consist of 1 judge and a jury
where required. As courts of appeal from decisions of the magistrate
courts consisting of 1 justice of the peace, they consist of 1 judge and
retry the case.

### Magistrate courts

Magistrate courts (; also called Justices of the Peace Courts) handle
criminal cases where imprisonment is for less than three years such as
petty hooliganism, public drunkenness, and serious traffic violations of
a non-criminal nature, minor civil cases such as simple divorces, some
property cases, disputes over land, and some labor cases, as well as
some federal administrative law cases. The magistrate courts were
expected to hear two-thirds of all civil cases and close to 100,000
criminal cases. It consists of one magistrate or justice of the peace.

### Arbitration courts

Arbitration courts (; also called *arbitrazh* or commercial courts) hear
cases dealing with a wide matter of contractual issues, such as rights
of ownership, contract changes, performance of obligations, loans, bank
accounts, and bankruptcy. They operate independently of the other
courts. The Supreme Court of Arbitration of Russia (also called the
Supreme Commercial Court, the Supreme Arbitrazh Court, or the Supreme
Arbitration Court) is the highest such court, and consists of 1 chairman
and 4 deputy chairmen.

Administration
--------------

Pursuant to the 2002 Federal Law on Organs of the Judicial Community,
which is the legal basis for the judicial organs of self-government, the
All-Russian Congress of Judges is the supreme body of the judiciary. The
Congress elects the members of the Council of Judges, the
self-government body of the judiciary.

The Judicial Department of the Supreme Court of Russia is responsible
for administration of the courts, such as selection and training of
judicial candidates, working with law institutes, and qualifications of
judges and other court officers. It is expected to enhance the
independence of the judicial branch. It also supports the Council of
Judges and the Supreme Qualifying Collegium.

Judicial Qualification Collegia are bodies of judicial self-regulation
that were established at the regional (Judicial Qualification Collegia)
and national (Supreme Qualification Collegium) levels. They play a key
role in the appointment, promotion and dismissal of judges.

Some judges serve as a court chairperson. The court chairperson is
solely responsible for the allocation of cases to judges, has
considerable powers in the matters of appointment, and makes the initial
recommendation for disciplinary measures, in particular dismissal.

Officers
--------

### Judges

Judges are appointed by the Federation Council, and serve for life.
Candidates are recommended by the Qualification Collegia / Supreme
Qualification Collegium to the President, who in turn recommends
candidates to the Federation Council.

The judges of the Constitutional Court are nominated by the President
and appointed by the Federation Council for 12 years, and the judges
must be at least 40 years old and must retire at 70 years old. The also
must have served as a lawyer for at least 15 years and have a
"recognized high qualification" (quotation from Constitutional Court
Act) in law.

The Russian Minister of Justice is responsible for appointing judges to
regional and city courts; however, in practice, many appointments below
the national level still are made by the chief executives of subnational
jurisdictions.

Judges of the district courts are appointed by the President. A
candidate must be at least 25 years old, is expected to have received a
higher legal education (commonly a *specialist degree*), have at least 5
years of experience in the legal profession, and pass an examination
from the Ministry of Justice.

Justices of the peace are usually appointed by the regional legislature,
but may also be elected. Justices of the peace require most of the same
qualifications.

### Prosecutors

<file:RIAN> archive 128943 The G8 Interior, Justice Ministers' and
Attorney Generals' Meeting.jpg|thumb|Yury Chaika, the Prosecutor General
of Russia. The Prosecutor General of Russia is the highest prosecutor in
Russia, and both he and his office are independent from the executive,
legislative and judicial branches of power. The Prosecutor General
remains the most powerful component of the Russian judicial system.

The Prosecutor General is entrusted with:

1.  prosecution in court on behalf of the State;
2.  representation of the interests of a citizen or of the State in
    court in cases determined by law;
3.  supervision of the observance of laws by bodies that conduct
    detective and search activity, inquiry and pre-trial investigation;
4.  supervision of the observance of laws in the execution of judicial
    decisions in criminal cases, and also in the application of other
    measures of coercion related to the restraint of personal liberty of
    citizens.

The Investigative Committee of Russia, sometimes described as the
"Russian FBI", is the main federal investigating authority in Russia,
formed in place of the Investigative Committee of the Prosecutor General
in 2011.

The Prosecutor General is nominated by the President of Russia and
appointed by the majority of Federation Council for a term of five
years. If the nomination fails, the President must nominate another
candidate within 30 days. The resignation of the Prosecutor General
before the end of his term should be approved by both a majority of
Federation Council and the President.

### Advocates

The Russian legal profession is unregulated, but there have been moves
towards unification and regulation recently. Anyone with a legal
education can practice law, but only a member of the ''''  may
practice before a criminal court. Legal education has traditionally
begun with the specialist degree in law . An "advocate" is an attorney
who has demonstrated qualification and belongs to an organizational
structure of advocates specified by law, known as being "called to the
bar" in commonwealth countries.

An examination is administered by the qualifications commission of a
court for admission to its ''''. To sit for the exam, one must have a
higher legal education (commonly a specialist degree) and either two
years of experience in legal work or a training program in a law firm.
The exam is both written and oral, but the main test is oral. The
qualifications commission is composed of seven advocates, two judges,
two representatives of the regional legislature, and two representatives
of the Ministry of Justice.

In 1988 there were 25,000 lawyers, and in 2002 there were 47,000 defense
lawyers in all of Russia.

### Jurors

A juror must be 25 years old, legally competent, and without a criminal
record.

Law
---

Image:Jurfak SPb.jpg|thumb|The Faculty of Law building at Saint
Petersburg State University.

The judiciary is primarily regulated by the Constitution of Russia, the
Code of Criminal Procedure, and the 1996 Federal Constitutional Law on
the Judicial System of the Russian Federation. The Constitution states
that the judicial branch is independent of the legislative and executive
branches, but there have been serious violations of the accepted
separation of powers doctrine.

There is no usage of precedent, as used in common law legal systems. As
such, the law on appeal may depend on the composition of the chamber
deciding the appeal. A chamber normally consists of 3 judges, out of the
dozens of judges within the court (19 in the Constitutional Court, 115
in the Supreme Court). Without the legal principle of *stare decisis*,
for each case a chamber may come to a different, even contradictory,
conclusion, even compared to chambers within the same session. If they
come to relatively consistent decisions, those in civil law legal
systems call this *jurisprudence constante*.

### Procedure

For serious and specific crimes, the accused have the option of a jury
trial consisting of 12 jurors. The crimes that may be tried by a jury
are murder, kidnapping, rape with aggravating circumstances, child
trafficking, gangsterism, large-scale bribery, treason, terrorism,
public calls for violent change in the constitutional system or for the
seizure of power, and select other crimes against the state. The
Constitution of Russia stipulates that, until the abolition of the death
penalty, all defendants in a case that may result in a death sentence
are entitled to a jury trial.

Jurors are selected by the prosecution and defense from a list of 30-40
eligible candidates. They are similar to common law juries, and unlike
lay judges, in that they sit separately from the judges and decide
questions of fact alone while the judge determines questions of law.
They must return unanimous verdicts during the first 3 hours of
deliberation, but may return majority verdicts after that, with 6 jurors
being enough to acquit. They may also request that the judge show
leniency in sentencing.

Everyone has the right of legal assistance. The accused have the right
to a defense lawyer from the time they are detained, put in custody,
charged, or declared a suspect. According to the 2001 Code of Criminal
Procedure, defense lawyers can participate in investigations with the
consent of the prosecutor, meet privately with a client, collect
evidence independently of the prosecutor, identify defense witnesses,
present expert witnesses, be present for all court procedures, access to
the prosecutions evidence after the investigation, and to file appeals
regarding court procedures.

Analysis and criticism
----------------------

The *arbitrazh* courts have been singled out as particularly effective
in dealing with business issues. Also, the number of people seeking
assistance of the judicial system has increased from 1 million under
Yeltsin to 6 million under Putin.

However, Transparency International found that 78% of respondents
reported they did not expect to find justice in the courts. Both public
perception and comments from senior judges point to bribery as prevalent
at the trial court level.

There have been serious violations of the accepted separation of powers
doctrine. Constitutional Court Judge and Council of Judges member
Vladimir Yaroslavtsev, in a 2009 interview with the Spanish newspaper El
País, claimed that the presidential executive office and security
services had undermined judicial independence in Russia. Constitutional
Court Judge Anatoly Kononov, who had frequently dissented from decisions
taken by the majority of the court, in his interview to Sobesednik
supported Yaroslavtsev, claiming that there was no independent judiciary
in Russia. In October the Constitutional Court in an unprecedented
motion accused Yaroslavtsev of "undermining the authority of the
judiciary" in violation of the judicial code, and Yaroslavtsev
eventually resigned from the Council of Judges but remained a judge;
Kononov resigned from the Constitutional Court on, seven years ahead of
schedule.

The VIII All-Russian Congress of Judges met from .
