Rus}}

**Kievan Rus**' (Old East Slavic Рѹ́сь, Рѹ́сьскаѧ землѧ, Greek Ῥωσία,
Latin Rus(s)ia, Ruscia, Ruzzia, Rut(h)enia, Old Norse
Gardarike|Garðaríki) was a loose federation of East Slavic tribes in
Europe from the late 9th to the mid-13th century, under the reign of the
Rurik dynasty. The modern peoples of Belarus, Ukraine, and Russia all
claim Kievan Rus' as their cultural inheritance. At its greatest extent
in the mid-11th century, it stretched from the Baltic Sea in the north
to the Black Sea in the south and from the headwaters of the Vistula in
the west to the Taman Peninsula in the east, uniting the majority of
East Slavic tribes.

Kievan Rus' begins with the rule (882–912) of Prince Oleg, who extended
his control from Novgorod south along the Dnieper river valley in order
to protect trade from Khazar incursions from the east and moved his
capital to the more strategic Kiev. Sviatoslav I (died 972) achieved the
first major expansion of Kievan Rus' territorial control, fighting a war
of conquest against the Khazar Empire. Vladimir the Great (980–1015)
introduced Christianity with his own baptism and, by decree, that of all
the inhabitants of Kiev and beyond. Kievan Rus' reached its greatest
extent under Yaroslav I (1019–1054); his sons assembled and issued its
first written legal code, the Rus' Justice, shortly after his death.

The state declined beginning in the late 11th century and during the
12th century, disintegrating into various rival regional powers. It was
further weakened by economic factors such as the collapse of Rus'
commercial ties to Byzantium due to the decline of Constantinople and
the accompanying diminution of trade routes through its territory. The
state finally fell to the Mongol invasion of the 1240s.

Name
----

During its existence, Kievan Rus' was known as the "land of the Rus'"
(Old East Slavic:, from the ethnonym ; Greek: ; Arabic: ), in Greek as
, in Old French as, in Latin as (with local German spelling variants
*Ruscia* and *Ruzzia*), and later also as pseudo-antique ''''. Various
etymologies have been proposed, including *Ruotsi*, the Finnish
designation for Sweden, and *Ros*, a tribe from the middle Dnieper
valley region.

The term "Kievan Rus'"  was coined in the 19th century in Russian
historiography to refer to the period when the center was in Kiev. In
English, the term was introduced in the early 20th century, when it was
found in the 1913 English translation of Vasily Klyuchevsky's *A History
of Russia*, to distinguish the early polity from successor states, which
were also named *Rus*. Later, the Russian term was rendered into
Belarusian and Ukrainian as and, respectively.

History
-------

### Origin

Prior to the emergence of Kievan Rus', the lands between the Baltic Sea
and Black Sea had been primarily populated by eastern Slavic tribes. In
the northern region around Novgorod were the Ilmen Slavs and neighboring
Krivichi, who occupied territories surrounding the headwaters of the
West Dvina, Dnieper, and Volga Rivers. To their north, in the Ladoga and
Karelia regions, were the Finnic Chud tribe. In the south, in the area
around Kiev, were the Poliane, a group of Slavicized tribes with Iranian
origins, the Drevliane to the west of the Dnieper, and the Severiane to
the east. To their north and east were the Vyatichi, and to their south
was forested land settled by Slav farmers, giving way to steppelands
populated by nomadic herdsmen.

Controversy persists over whether the Rus' people|Rus’ were Varangians
(Vikings) or Slavs. This uncertainty is due largely to a paucity of
contemporary sources. Attempts to address this question instead rely on
archaeological evidence, the accounts of foreign observers, legends and
literature from centuries later. To some extent the controversy is
related to the foundation myths of modern states in the region.
According to the "Normanist" view, the Rus' were Scandinavians, while
Russian and Ukrainian nationalist historians generally argue that the
Rus' were themselves Slavs. Normanist theories focus on the earliest
written source for the East Slavs, the *Russian Primary Chronicle*,
although even this account was not produced until the 12th century.
Nationalist accounts have suggested that the Rus' were present before
the arrival of the Varangians, noting that only a handful of
Scandinavian words can be found in modern Russian and that Scandinavian
names in the early chronicles were soon replaced by Slavic names.
Nevertheless, archaeological evidence from the area suggests that a
Scandinavian population was present during the 10th century at the
latest. On balance, it seems likely that the Rus' proper were a small
minority of Scandinavians who formed an elite ruling class, while the
great majority of their subjects were Slavs. Considering the linguistic
arguments mounted by nationalist scholars, if the proto-Rus' were
Scandinavians, they must have quickly become nativized, adopting Slavic
languages and other cultural practices.

Ahmad ibn Fadlan, an Arab traveler during the 10th century, provided one
of the earliest written descriptions of the Rus': "They are as tall as a
date palm, blond and ruddy, so that they do not need to wear a tunic nor
a cloak; rather the men among them wear garments that only cover half of
his body and leaves one of his hands free." Liutprand of Cremona, who
was twice an envoy to the Byzantine court (949 and 968), identifies the
"Russi" with the Norse ("the Russi, whom we call Norsemen by another
name") but explains the name as a Greek term referring to their physical
traits ("A certain people made up of a part of the Norse, whom the
Greeks call *[...]* the Russi on account of their physical features, we
designate as Norsemen because of the location of their origin."). Leo
the Deacon, a 10th-century Byzantine historian and chronicler, refers to
the Rus' as "Scythians" and notes that they tended to adopt Greek
rituals and customs.

### Invitation of the Varangians

According to the *Primary Chronicle*, the territories of the East Slavs
in the 9th century were divided between the Varangians and the Khazars.
The Varangians are first mentioned imposing tribute from Slavic and
Finnic tribes in 859. In 862, the Finnic and Slavic tribes in the area
of Novgorod rebelled against the Varangians, driving them "back beyond
the sea and, refusing them further tribute, set out to govern
themselves." The tribes had no laws, however, and soon began to make war
with one another, prompting them to invite the Varangians back to rule
them and bring peace to the region:

The three brothers—Rurik, Sineus, and Truvor—established themselves in
Novgorod, Beloozero, and Izborsk, respectively. Two of the brothers
died, and Rurik became the sole ruler of the territory and progenitor of
the Rurik Dynasty. A short time later, two of Rurik’s men, Askold and
Dir, asked him for permission to go to Tsargrad (Constantinople). On
their way south, they discovered "a small city on a hill," Kiev,
captured it and the surrounding country from the Khazars, populated the
region with more Varangians, and "established their dominion over the
country of the Polyanians."

The Chronicle reports that Askold and Dir continued to Constantinople
with a navy to attack the city in 863-66, catching the Byzantines by
surprise and ravaging the surrounding area, though other accounts date
the attack in 860. Patriarch Photius vividly describes the "universal"
devastation of the suburbs and nearby islands, and another account
further details the destruction and slaughter of the invasion. The Rus'
turned back before attacking the city itself, due either to a storm
dispersing their boats, the return of the Emperor, or in a later
account, due to a miracle after a ceremonial appeal by the Patriarch and
the Emperor to the Virgin. The attack was the first encounter between
the Rus' and Byzantines and led the Patriarch to send missionaries north
to engage and attempt to convert the Rus' and the Slavs.

### Foundation of the Kievan state

Rurik led the Rus' until his death in about 879, bequeathing his kingdom
to his kinsman, Prince Oleg, as regent for his young son, Igor. In
880-82, Oleg led a military force south along the Dnieper river,
capturing Smolensk and Lyubech before reaching Kiev, where he deposed
and killed Askold and Dir, proclaimed himself prince, and declared Kiev
the "mother of Rus' cities." Oleg set about consolidating his power over
the surrounding region and the riverways north to Novgorod, imposing
tribute on the East Slav tribes. In 883, he conquered the Drevliane,
imposing a fur tribute on them. By 885 he had subjugated the Poliane,
Severiane, Vyatichi, and Radimichs, forbidding them to pay further
tribute to the Khazars. Oleg continued to develop and expand a network
of Rus' forts in Slav lands, begun by Rurik in the north.

The new Kievan state prospered due to its abundant supply of furs,
beeswax, honey, and slaves for export, and because it controlled three
main trade routes of Eastern Europe. In the north, Novgorod served as a
commercial link between the Baltic Sea and the Volga trade route to the
lands of the Volga Bulgars, the Khazars, and across the Caspian Sea as
far as Baghdad, providing access to markets and products from Central
Asia and the Middle East. Trade from the Baltic also moved south on a
network of rivers and short portages along the Dnieper known as the
"route from the Varangians to the Greeks," continuing to the Black Sea
and on to Constantinople. Kiev was a central outpost along the Dnieper
route and a hub with the east-west overland trade route between the
Khazars and the Germanic lands of Central Europe. These commercial
connections enriched Rus' merchants and princes, funding military forces
and the construction of churches, palaces, fortifications, and further
towns. Demand for luxury goods fostered production of expensive jewelry
and religious wares, allowing their export, and an advanced credit and
money-lending system may have also been in place.

### Early foreign relations

#### Volatile steppe politics

The rapid expansion of the Rus' to the south led to conflict and
volatile relationships with the Khazars and other neighbors on the
Pontic steppe. The Khazars dominated the Black Sea steppe during the 8th
century, trading and frequently allying with the Byzantine Empire
against Persians and Arabs. In the late 8th century, the collapse of the
Göktürks|Göktürk Khaganate led the Magyars and the Pechenegs, Ugric and
Turkic peoples from Central Asia, to migrate west into the steppe
region, leading to military conflict, disruption of trade, and
instability within the Khazar Khaganate. The Rus' and Slavs had earlier
allied with the Khazars against Arab raids on the Caucasus, but they
increasingly worked against them to secure control of the trade routes.

The Byzantine Empire was able to take advantage of the turmoil to expand
its political influence and commercial relationships, first with the
Khazars and later with the Rus' and other steppe groups. The Byzantines
established the Theme of Cherson, formally known as Klimata, in the
Crimea in the 830s to defend against raids by the Rus' and to protect
vital grain shipments supplying Constantinople. Cherson also served as a
key diplomatic link with the Khazars and others on the steppe, and it
became the center of Black Sea commerce. The Byzantines also helped the
Khazars build a fortress at Sarkel on the Don river to protect their
northwest frontier against incursions by the Turkic migrants and the
Rus’, and to control caravan trade routes and the portage between the
Don and Volga rivers.

The expansion of the Rus’ put further military and economic pressure on
the Khazars, depriving them of territory, tributaries, and trade. In
around 890, Oleg waged an indecisive war in the lands of the lower
Dniester and Dnieper rivers with the Tivertsi and the Ulichs, who were
likely acting as vassals of the Magyars, blocking Rus' access to the
Black Sea. In 894, the Magyars and Pechenegs were drawn into
Byzantine-Bulgarian Wars\#Simeon I’s Imperial ambitions|the wars between
the Byzantines and the Bulgarian Empire. The Byzantines arranged for the
Magyars to attack Bulgarian territory from the north, and Bulgaria in
turn persuaded the Pechenegs to attack the Magyars from their rear.
Boxed in, the Magyars were forced to migrate further west across the
Carpathian mountains into the Hungarian plain, depriving the Khazars of
an important ally and a buffer from the Rus'. The migration of the
Magyars allowed Rus' access to the Black Sea, and they soon launched
excursions into Khazar territory along the sea coast, up the Don river,
and into the lower Volga region. The Rus' were raiding and plundering
into the Caspian Sea region by 913, when they raided Baku and penetrated
into the Caucasus.

As the 10th century progressed, the Khazars were no longer able to
command tribute from the Volga Bulgars, and their relationship with the
Byzantines deteriorated, as Byzantium increasingly allied with the
Pechenegs against them. The Pechenegs were thus secure to raid the lands
of the Khazars from their base between the Volga and Don rivers,
allowing them to expand to the west. Rus’ relations with the Pechenegs
were complex, as the groups alternately formed alliances with and
against one another. The Pechenegs were nomads roaming the steppe
raising livestock which they traded with the Rus’ for agricultural goods
and other products. The lucrative Rus’ trade with the Byzantine Empire
had to pass through Pecheneg-controlled territory, so the need for
generally peaceful relations was essential. Nevertheless, while the
Primary Chronicle reports the Pechenegs entering Rus' territory in 915
and then making peace, they were waging war with one another again in
920. Pechenegs are reported assisting the Rus’ in later campaigns
against the Byzantines, yet allied with the Byzantines against the Rus’
at other times.

#### Rus’-Byzantine relations

After the Rus' attack on Constantinople in 860, the Byzantine Patriarch
Photius sent missionaries north to convert the Rus' and the Slavs.
Prince Rastislav of Great Moravia had requested the Emperor to provide
teachers to interpret the holy scriptures, so in 863 the brothers Cyril
and Methodius were sent as missionaries, due to their knowledge of the
Slavonic language. The Slavs had no written language, so the brothers
devised the Glagolitic alphabet, later developed into Cyrillic, and
standardized the language of the Slavs, later known as Old Church
Slavonic. They translated portions of the Bible and drafted the first
Slavic civil code and other documents, and the language and texts spread
throughout Slavic territories, including Kievan Rus’. The mission of
Cyril and Methodius served both evangelical and diplomatic purposes,
spreading Byzantine cultural influence in support of imperial foreign
policy. In 867 the Patriarch announced that the Rus' had accepted a
bishop, and in 874 he speaks of an "Archbishop of the Rus'."

Relations between the Rus’ and Byzantines became more complex after Oleg
took control over Kiev, reflecting commercial, cultural, and military
concerns. The wealth and income of the Rus' depended heavily upon trade
with Byzantium. Constantine Porphyrogenitus described the annual course
of the princes of Kiev, collecting tribute from client tribes,
assembling the product into a flotilla of hundreds of boats, conducting
them down the Dnieper to the Black Sea, and sailing to the estuary of
the Dniester, the Danube delta, and on to Constantinople. On their
return trip they would carry silk fabrics, spices, wine, and fruit. The
importance of this trade relationship led to military action when
disputes arose. The Primary Chronicle reports that the Rus' attacked
Constantinople again in 907, probably to secure trade access. The
Chronicle glorifies the military prowess and shrewdness of Oleg, an
account imbued with legendary detail. Byzantine sources do not mention
the attack, but a pair of treaties in 907 and 911 set forth a trade
agreement with the Rus', the terms suggesting pressure on the
Byzantines, who granted the Rus' quarters and supplies for their
merchants and tax-free trading privileges in Constantinople.

The Chronicle provides a mythic tale of Oleg’s death. A sorcerer
prophesies that the death of the Grand Prince would be associated with a
certain horse. Oleg has the horse sequestered, and it later dies. Oleg
goes to visit the horse and stands over the carcass, gloating that he
had out-lived the threat, when a snake strikes him from among the bones,
and he soon becomes ill and dies. The Chronicle reports that Prince Igor
succeeded Oleg in 913, and after some brief conflicts with the Drevlians
and the Pechenegs, a period of peace ensued for over twenty years.

In 941, Igor led another Rus'–Byzantine War (941)|major Rus’ attack on
Constantinople, probably over trading rights again. A navy of 10,000
vessels, including Pecheneg allies, landed on the Bithynian coast and
devastated the Asiatic shore of the Bosphorus. The attack was
well-timed, perhaps due to intelligence, as the Byzantine fleet was
occupied with the Arabs in the Mediterranean, and the bulk of its army
was stationed in the east. The Rus’ burned towns, churches, and
monasteries, butchering the people and amassing booty. The emperor
arranged for a small group of retired ships to be outfitted with Greek
fire throwers and sent them out to meet the Rus’, luring them into
surrounding the contingent before unleashing the Greek fire. Liudprand
of Cremona wrote that "the Rus', seeing the flames, jumped overboard,
preferring water to fire. Some sank, weighed down by the weight of their
breastplates and helmets; others caught fire." Those captured were
beheaded. The ploy dispelled the Rus’ fleet, but their attacks continued
into the hinterland as far as Nicomedia, with many atrocities reported
as victims were crucified and set up for use as targets. At last a
Byzantine army arrived from the Balkans to drive the Rus’ back, and a
naval contingent reportedly destroyed much of the Rus’ fleet on its
return voyage (possibly an exaggeration since the Rus’ soon mounted
another attack). The outcome indicates increased military might by
Byzantium since 911, suggesting a shift in the balance of power.

Igor returned to Kiev keen for revenge. He assembled a large force of
warriors from among neighboring Slavs and Pecheneg allies, and sent for
reinforcements of Varangians from “beyond the sea.” In 944 the Rus’
force advanced again on the Greeks, by land and sea, and a Byzantine
force from Cherson responded. The Emperor sent gifts and offered tribute
in lieu of war, and the Rus’ accepted. Envoys were sent between the
Rus’, the Byzantines, and the Bulgarians in 945, and a peace treaty was
completed. The agreement again focused on trade, but this time with
terms less favorable to the Rus’, including stringent regulations on the
conduct of Rus’ merchants in Cherson and Constantinople and specific
punishments for violations of the law. The Byzantines may have been
motivated to enter the treaty out of concern of a prolonged alliance of
the Rus', Pechenegs, and Bulgarians against them, though the more
favorable terms further suggest a shift in power.

#### Sviatoslav

Following the death of Grand Prince Igor in 945, his wife Olga ruled as
regent in Kiev until their son Sviatoslav reached maturity (ca. 963).
His decade-long reign over Rus' was marked by rapid expansion through
the conquest of the Khazars of the Pontic steppe and the invasion of the
Balkans. By the end of his short life, Sviatoslav carved out for himself
the largest state in Europe, eventually moving his capital from Kiev to
Pereyaslavets on the Danube in 969. In contrast with his mother's
conversion to Christianity, Sviatoslav, like his druzhina, remained a
staunch pagan. Due to his abrupt death in an ambush in 972, Sviatoslav's
conquests, for the most part, were not consolidated into a functioning
empire, while his failure to establish a stable succession led to a
fratricidal feud among his sons, resulted in two of his three sons being
killed.

### Reign of Vladimir and Christianisation

It is not clearly documented when the title of the Grand Duke was first
introduced, but the importance of the Kiev principality was recognized
after the death of Sviatoslav I in 972 and the ensuing struggle between
Vladimir the Great and Yaropolk I. The region of Kiev dominated the
state of Kievan Rus' for the next two centuries. The Grand Prince
(velikiy kniaz') of Kiev controlled the lands around the city, and his
formally subordinate relatives ruled the other cities and paid him
tribute. The zenith of the state's power came during the reigns of
Vladimir the Great (980–1015) and Prince Yaroslav I the Wise
(1019–1054). Both rulers continued the steady expansion of Kievan Rus'
that had begun under Oleg.

Vladimir had been prince of Novgorod when his father Sviatoslav I died
in 972. He was forced to flee to Scandinavia in 976 after his
half-brother Yaropolk had murdered his other brother Oleg and taken
control of Rus. In Scandinavia, with the help of his relative Earl Håkon
Sigurdsson, ruler of Norway, Vladimir assembled a viking army and
reconquered Novgorod and Kiev from Yaropolk. As Prince of Kiev,
Vladimir's most notable achievement was the Christianization of Kievan
Rus', a process that began in 988. The Primary Chronicle states that
when Vladimir had decided to accept a new faith instead of the
traditional idol-worship (paganism) of the Slavs, he sent out some of
his most valued advisors and warriors as emissaries to different parts
of Europe. They visited the Christians of the Latin Rite, the Jews, and
the Muslims before finally arriving in Constantinople. They rejected
Islam because, among other things, it prohibited the consumption of
alcohol, and Judaism because the god of the Jews had permitted his
chosen people to be deprived of their country. They found the ceremonies
in the Roman church to be dull. But at Constantinople, they were so
astounded by the beauty of the cathedral of Hagia Sophia and the
liturgical service held there that they made up their minds there and
then about the faith they would like to follow. Upon their arrival home,
they convinced Vladimir that the faith of the Byzantine Rite was the
best choice of all, upon which Vladimir made a journey to Constantinople
and arranged to marry Princess Anna, the sister of Byzantine emperor
Basil II.

Vladimir's choice of Eastern Christianity may also have reflected his
close personal ties with Constantinople, which dominated the Black Sea
and hence trade on Kiev's most vital commercial route, the Dnieper
River. Adherence to the Eastern Church had long-range political,
cultural, and religious consequences. The church had a liturgy written
in Cyrillic and a corpus of translations from Greek that had been
produced for the Slavic peoples. This literature facilitated the
conversion to Christianity of the Eastern Slavs and introduced them to
rudimentary Greek philosophy, science, and historiography without the
necessity of learning Greek (there were some merchants who did business
with Greeks and likely had an understanding of contemporary business
Greek). In contrast, educated people in medieval Western and Central
Europe learned Latin. Enjoying independence from the Roman authority and
free from tenets of Latin learning, the East Slavs developed their own
literature and fine arts, quite distinct from those of other Eastern
Orthodox countries. (See Old East Slavic language and Architecture of
Kievan Rus for details ). Following the Great Schism of 1054, the Rus'
church maintained communion with both Rome and Constantinople for some
time, but along with most of the Eastern churches it eventually split to
follow the Eastern Orthodox. That being said, unlike other parts of the
Greek world, Kievan Rus' did not have a strong hostility to the Western
world.

### Consolidation of power

In addition to collecting tribute, Vladimir's sons were responsible for
defending the orthodox missions and protecting their borders. These
functions, as well as military engagements for conquest, required each
prince to have a military force at his disposal. Like their forefathers,
Vladimir and his sons each relied on a *Druzhina*, a military force they
supported and maintained in permanent service. By dispersing his sons
around the country Vladimir also ensured that their military forces
would be stationed at some distance from one another, where they could
defend the frontiers of Kievan Rus' and also be less likely to fight
each other. Yet, in a pressing situation, any one of the princes could
supplement his military force with auxiliary troops, drafted among the
slav population or hired from abroad. Although Varangians were
originally foot soldiers, the armed forces of Kieven Rus' princes
increasingly became horsemen. Their armor included helmets, cuirasses,
and shields; their weapons consisted of swords, spears, maces, and
battle-axes. Bows and arrows were also used, usually by auxiliary
troops. Commercial opportunities had been one of the most compelling
features that had initially attracted the Varangians to the Slavic
lands. Vladimir and his sons sold local products as well as prisoners
taken in battle for silver and commodities that were more useful or
valuable to them for military purposes as status symbols, or, after 988,
for conducting religious services and ceremonies.

In 965 prince Sviatoslav I of Kiev conducted an attack on Sarkel, a
Khazar fortress that stood on the Don River guarding the approaches to
the Khazar Empire from the Black Sea, and on Khazar territories in the
North Caucasus. His victory is considered to have delivered a fatal blow
to Khazaria, which subsequently collapsed. Its demise, recorded in both
the Primary Chronicle and Islamic sources, shocked and destabilized the
entire region of the lower Volga, Caspian, and North Caucasus.

### Golden age

Yaroslav, known as "the Wise", struggled for power with his brothers. A
son of Vladimir the Great, he was vice-regent of Novgorod at the time of
his father's death in 1015. Subsequently, his eldest surviving brother,
Svyatopolk the Accursed, killed three of his other brothers and seized
power in Kiev. Yaroslav, with the active support of the Novgorodians and
the help of Viking mercenaries, defeated Svyatopolk and became the grand
prince of Kiev in 1019. Although he first established his rule over Kiev
in 1019, he did not have uncontested rule of all of Kievan Rus' until
1036. Like Vladimir, Yaroslav was eager to improve relations with the
rest of Europe, especially the Byzantine Empire. Yaroslav's
granddaughter, Eupraxia the daughter of his son Vsevolod I, Prince of
Kiev, was married to Henry III, Holy Roman Emperor. Yaroslav also
arranged marriages for his sister and three daughters to the kings of
Poland, France, Hungary and Norway. Yaroslav promulgated the first East
Slavic law code, *Russkaya Pravda*; built Saint Sophia Cathedral in Kiev
and Saint Sophia Cathedral in Novgorod; patronized local clergy and
monasticism; and is said to have founded a school system. Yaroslav's
sons developed the great Kiev Pechersk Lavra (monastery), which
functioned in Kievan Rus' as an ecclesiastical academy.

In the centuries that followed the state's foundation, Rurik's
descendants shared power over Kievan Rus'. Princely succession moved
from elder to younger brother and from uncle to nephew, as well as from
father to son. Junior members of the dynasty usually began their
official careers as rulers of a minor district, progressed to more
lucrative principalities, and then competed for the coveted throne of
Kiev.

Combined, the tribute commercial profits and fees assessed on specific
segments of Rus' society provided the Ryurikid dynasty with the revenue
necessary to support themselves and their military retainers or armies
as well as the Church. In return the princes provided their subjects
with protection and the priests offered spiritual guidance. Together
they transformed an agglomeration of settlements surrounding forts,
trade ports and sites for worship into a dynamic state dotted with
economically thriving cities adorned with architectural mounuments which
heightened the prestige of the members of the secular and ecclesiastical
elites who sponsored their construction. The effects of the mingling of
the Ryurikid dynasty, the Orthodox Church and the eastern slavs society
were dramatic.

By the reign of Prince Yaroslav the Wise, Kievan Rus' reached its golden
age. This era was marked by an unsual degree of political unity and
peace. The first version of the Ruskaya Pravda and the construction of
the Church of St. Sophia with its school and library have been
identified as its great achievements. The spirit of optimism was also
found in the literature: The *Sermon on Law and Grace* composed between
1037 and 1051 by Hilarion, the first native of Kievan Rus to become
Metropolitan of Kiev and All-Rus' is an example. The law code introduced
by Yaroslav was repeatedly adapted to the changing social and economic
conditions of the next two centuries and was adopted virtually
throughout the realm. The expanded Ruskaya Pravda, as it emerged in the
thirteenth century survived as the legal norm for the Russian
principalities through the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, long
after the Kievan Rus' disappeared.

### Fragmentation and decline

The gradual disintegration of the Kievan Rus' began in the 11th century,
after the death of Yaroslav the Wise. The position of the Grand Prince
of Kiev was weakened by the growing influence of regional clans.

An unconventional power succession system was established (rota system)
whereby power was transferred to the eldest member of the ruling dynasty
rather than from father to son, i.e. in most cases to the eldest brother
of the ruler, fomenting constant hatred and rivalry within the royal
family. Familicide was frequently deployed in obtaining power and can be
traced particularly during the time of the Yaroslavichi rule (sons of
Yaroslav the Wise) when the established system was skipped in the
establishment of Vladimir II Monomakh as the Grand Prince of Kiev, in
turn creating major squabbles between Olegovichi from Chernihiv,
Monomakhs from Pereyaslav, Izyaslavichi from Turov/Volhynia, and Polotsk
Princes.

The most prominent struggle for power was the conflict that erupted
after the death of Yaroslav the Wise. The rivaling Principality of
Polotsk was contesting the power of the Grand Prince by occupying
Novgorod, while Rostislav Vladimirovich was fighting for the Black Sea
port of Tmutarakan belonging to Chernihiv. Three of Yaroslav's sons that
first allied together found themselves fighting each other especially
after their defeat to the Cuman forces in 1068 at the Battle of the Alta
River. At the same time an uprising took place in Kiev, bringing to
power Vseslav of Polotsk who supported the traditional Slavic paganism.
The ruling Grand Prince Iziaslav fled to Poland asking for support and
in couple of years returned to establish the order. The affairs became
even more complicated by the end of the 11th century driving the state
into chaos and constant warfare. On the initiative of Vladimir II
Monomakh in 1097 the first federal council of Kievan Rus took place near
Chernihiv in the city of Liubech with the main intention to find an
understanding among the fighting sides. However even though that did not
really stop the fighting, it certainly cooled things off.

By 1130 all descendants of Vseslav the Seer were exiled to the Byzantine
Empire by Mstislav the Great. The most fierce resistance to Monomakhs
posed Olegovichi when the izgoi Vsevolod II managed to become the Grand
Prince of Kiev. Rostislavichi who have initially established in Halych
lands by 1189 were defeated by the Monomakh-Piast descendant Roman the
Great.

The decline of Constantinople — a main trading partner of Kievan Rus',
played a significant role in the decline of the Kievan Rus'. The trade
route from the Varangians to the Greeks, along which the goods were
moving from the Black Sea (mainly Byzantine) through eastern Europe to
the Baltic, was a cornerstone of Kiev wealth and prosperity. Kiev was
the main power and initiator in this relationship, once the Byzantine
Empire fell into turmoil and the supplies became erratic, profits dried
out, and Kiev lost its appeal.

The last ruler to maintain united state was Mstislav the Great. After
his death in 1132 the Kievan Rus' fell into recession and a rapid
decline, and Mstislav's successor Yaropolk II of Kiev instead of
focussing on the external threat of the Cumans was embroiled in
conflicts with the growing power of the Novgorod Republic. In 1169, as
the Kievan Rus' state was full of internal conflict, Andrei Bogolyubsky
of Vladimir sacked the city of Kiev. The sack of the city fundamentally
changed the perception of Kiev and was evidence of the fragmentation of
the Kievan Rus'. By the end of the 12th century, the Kievan state became
even further fragmented and had been divided into roughly twelve
different principalities.

The Crusades brought a shift in European trade routes that accelerated
the decline of Kievan Rus'. In 1204 the forces of the Fourth Crusade
sacked Constantinople, making the Dnieper trade route marginal. At the
same time the Teutonic Knights (of the Northern Crusades) were
conquering the Baltic region and threatening the Lands of Novgorod.
Concurrently with it the Ruthenian Federation of Kievan Rus' started to
disintegrate into smaller principalities as the Rurik dynasty grew. The
local Orthodox Christianity of Kievan Rus', while struggling to
establish itself in the predominantly pagan state and losing its main
base in Constantinople was on the brink of extinction. Some of the main
regional centers that later have developed were Novgorod, Chernigov,
Galich, Kiev, Ryazan, Vladimir-upon-Klyazma, Vladimir of Volyn, Polotsk,
and others.

#### Novgorod Republic

In the north, the Republic of Novgorod prospered because it controlled
trade routes from the River Volga to the Baltic Sea. As Kievan Rus'
declined, Novgorod became more independent. A local oligarchy ruled
Novgorod; major government decisions were made by a town assembly, which
also elected a prince as the city's military leader. In the 12th
century, Novgorod acquired its own archbishop Ilya in 1169, a sign of
increased importance and political independence, while about 30 years
prior to that in 1136 in Novgorod was established a republican form of
government - elective monarchy. Since then Novgorod enjoyed a wide
degree of autonomy although being closely associated with the Kievan
Rus.

#### Northeast

In the northeast, Slavs from the Kievan region colonized the territory
that eventually became the Grand Duchy of Moscow by subjugating and
merging with the Finnic tribes already occupying the area. The city of
Rostov, the oldest centre of the northeast, was supplanted first by
Suzdal and then by the city of Vladimir, which become the capital of
Vladimir-Suzdal'. The combined principality of Vladimir-Suzdal asserted
itself as a major power in Kievan Rus' in the late 12th century. In 1169
Prince Andrey Bogolyubskiy of Vladimir-Suzdal sacked the city of Kiev.
Prince Andrey then installed his younger brother, who ruled briefly in
Kiev while Andrey continued to rule his realm from Suzdal. Roman of
Halych (1160–1205) also claimed primacy in Rus at the time. In 1299, in
the wake of the Mongol invasion, the metropolitan moved from Kiev to the
city of Vladimir and Vladimir-Suzdal.

#### Southwest

To the southwest, the principality of Halych had developed trade
relations with its Polish, Hungarian and Lithuanian neighbours and
emerged as the local successor to Kievan Rus'. In the early 13th
century, Prince Roman Mstislavich united the two previously separate
principalities, conquered Kiev, and assumed the title of Grand Duke of
Kievan Rus'. His son, Prince Daniil (r. 1238–1264) was the first ruler
of Kievan Rus' to accept a crown from the Roman papacy, apparently doing
so without breaking with Constantinople. Early in the 14th century, the
patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church in Constantinople granted the
rulers of Galicia-Volhynia a metropolitan to compensate for the move of
the Kievan metropolitan to Vladimir. Lithuanian rulers also requested
and received a metropolitan for Novagrudok shortly afterwards. Early in
the 15th century, these Metropolia were ruled again from Kiev by the
"Metropolitan of Kiev, Galich and all Rus'".

However, a long and unsuccessful struggle against the Mongols combined
with internal opposition to the prince and foreign intervention weakened
Galicia-Volhynia. With the end of the Mstislavich branch of the Rurikids
in the mid-14th century, Galicia-Volhynia ceased to exist; Poland
conquered Galich; Lithuania took Volhynia, including Kiev, conquered by
Gediminas in 1321 ending the rule of Rurikids in the city. Lithuanian
rulers then assumed the title over Ruthenia.

### Final disintegration

The state finally disintegrated under the pressure of the Mongol
invasion of Rus', fragmenting it into successor principalities who paid
tribute to the Golden Horde (the so-called Tatar Yoke). In the late 15th
century the Muscovite Grand Dukes began taking over former Kievan
territories and proclaimed themselves the sole legal successors of the
Kievan principality according to the protocols of the medieval theory of
translatio imperii.

On the western periphery, Kievan Rus' was succeeded by the Principality
of Galicia-Volhynia. Later, as these territories, now part of modern
central Ukraine and Belarus, fell to the Gediminids, the powerful,
largely Ruthenized Grand Duchy of Lithuania drew heavily on Rus'
cultural and legal traditions. Due to the fact of the economic and
cultural core of Rus' being located on the territory of modern Ukraine,
some Ukrainian historians and scholars consider Kievan Rus' to be a
founding Ukrainian state.

On the north-eastern periphery of Kievan Rus', traditions were adapted
in the Vladimir-Suzdal Principality that gradually gravitated towards
Moscow. To the very north, the Novgorod and Pskov Feudal Republics
carried on a separate and less autocratic version of the Rus' legacy
into the 16th century until they were absorbed by the Grand Duchy of
Moscow.

Evolution of the economy
------------------------

During the Kievan era, the peoples of Rus' experienced a period of great
economic expansion, opening trade routes with the Vikings to the north
and west and the Byzantine Greeks to the south and west; traders also
began to travel south and east eventually making contact with Persia and
the peoples of Central Asia.

Peasants had lived in their own huts in family groups and farmed
personal plots of land using their own tools and livestock. Their
households were grouped into rural villages and organized into communes
(*verve* or *miry*) which had their roots in tribal and clannic ties
within the population. By the Kievan era, the communes had a territorial
identity as much as a clannic one. Members of each commune shared common
pasture lands, meadows, forests, fishing and hunting rights. They shared
responsibility for taxation and other legal obligations. Lands farmed in
Kievan Rus' were located primarily in two climatic zones: the forest
belt and the forest steppe. The vegetation that occurred naturally in
these regions was forest. Spruce and fir that prevailed in the northern
taiga gave way to cedar and birch then, further south, to oak. The
forestlands were well watered with extensive river systems flowing
through them and normally receiving adequate precipitation to sustain
agriculture. Their grey and dark grey soils, however, were not
particularly rich. Fertile black soils were located only to the west and
south of Kiev. Most of the lands of Kievan Rus' were located north of
the fiftieth parallel, and had short growing seasons.

To accommodate these conditions, the Slav peasants most commonly applied
a method of farming known as slash and burn. To clear a section of
forest for cultivation, they would cut deeply into the bark of the trees
and left them to die and dry, then burned them. The resulting ash added
sufficient nutrients to the soil to provide a fertile medium for several
years. When the nutrients in the soil of one clearing were depleted,
crops were moved to another that had been prepared in the interim. The
favored tool for farming was the *sokha* which was pulled across the
ground by a draft animal or a farmer. The *sokha*'s forked end, fitted
with iron shoes, scratched furrows in the light ash-covered soil of the
forest clearing. Farmers also used sickles for reaping, scythes for
mowing hay and mattocks.

Generally, cereal grains were raised in the forest clearings: rye in the
north, millet in the south, further supplemented by wheat, buckwheat,
oats and barley. They also produced other crops such as peas, lentils,
flax and hemp. Livestock was raised: horses, cattle, oxen, pigs, sheep,
goats and poultry being the most common animals in the kingdom.
Surrounding forests supplied the rural population with berries, fruits,
nuts and mushrooms. Farmers also regularly fished the rivers, lakes and
streams and hunted for game and fur pelts, as well as keeping beehives
for the production of wax and honey.

Society
-------

Due to the expansion of trade and its geographical proximity, Kiev
became the most important trade center and chief among the communes;
therefore the leader of Kiev gained political "control" over the
surrounding areas. This princedom emerged from a coalition of
traditional patriarchic family communes banded together in an effort to
increase the applicable workforce and expand the productivity of the
land. This union developed the first major cities in the Rus' and was
the first notable form of self-government. As these communes became
larger, the emphasis was taken off the family holdings and placed on the
territory that surrounded. This shift in ideology became known as the
verv'.

In the 11th century and the 12th century, the princes and their
retinues, which were a mixture of Slavic and Scandinavian elites,
dominated the society of Kievan Rus'. Leading soldiers and officials
received income and land from the princes in return for their political
and military services. Kievan society lacked the class institutions and
autonomous towns that were typical of Western European feudalism.
Nevertheless, urban merchants, artisans and labourers sometimes
exercised political influence through a city assembly, the *veche*
(council), which included all the adult males in the population. In some
cases, the veche either made agreements with their rulers or expelled
them and invited others to take their place. At the bottom of society
was a stratum of slaves. More important was a class of tribute-paying
peasants, who owed labour duty to the princes. The widespread personal
serfdom characteristic of Western Europe did not exist in Kievan Rus'

The change in political structure led to the inevitable development of
the peasant class or smerdy. The smerdy were free un-landed peoples that
found work by laboring for wages on the manors which began to develop
around 1031 as the verv' began to dominate socio-political structure.
The smerdy were initially given equality in the Kievian law code, they
were theoretically equal to the prince, so they enjoyed as much freedom
as can be expected of manual laborers. However in the 13th century they
began to slowly lose their rights and became less equal in the eyes of
the law.

Historical assessment
---------------------

Kievan Rus', although sparsely populated compared to Western Europe, was
not only the largest contemporary European state in terms of area but
also culturally advanced. Literacy in Kiev, Novgorod and other large
cities was high. As birch bark documents attest, they exchanged love
letters and prepared cheat sheets for schools. Novgorod had a sewage
system and wood paving not often found in other cities at the time. The
Russkaya Pravda confined punishments to fines and generally did not use
capital punishment. Certain inalienable rights were accorded to women,
such as property and inheritance rights.

The economic development of Kievan Rus may be translated into
demographic statistics. Around 1200, Kiev had a population of 50,000,
Novgorod and Chernigov both had around 30,000. Constantinople had
population of about 400,000 around 1180. The Soviet scholar Mikhail
Tikhomirov calculated that Kievan Rus' on the eve of the Mongol invasion
had around 300 urban centers.

Kievan Rus' also played an important genealogical role in European
politics. Yaroslav I the Wise, whose stepmother belonged to the greatest
dynasty to rule Byzantium, married the only legitimate daughter of the
king who Christianized Sweden. His daughters became queens of Hungary,
France and Norway, his sons married the daughters of a Polish king and a
Byzantine emperor (not to mention a niece of the Pope), while his
granddaughters were a German Empress and (according to one theory) the
queen of Scotland. A grandson married the only daughter of the last
Anglo-Saxon king of England. Thus the Rurikids were the most
well-connected royal family of the time.

Foreign relations
-----------------

### Turco-Mongols

From the 9th century, the Pecheneg nomads began an uneasy relationship
with Kievan Rus′. For over two centuries they launched random raids into
the lands of Rus′, which sometimes escalated into full-scale wars (such
as the 920 war on the Pechenegs by Igor of Kiev reported in the Primary
Chronicle), but there were also temporary military alliances (e.g. the
943 Byzantine campaign by Igor). In 968, the Pechenegs attacked and
besieged the city of Kiev. Some speculation exists that the Pechenegs
drove off the Tivertsi and the Ulichs to the regions of the upper
Dniester river in Bukovina. The Byzantine Empire was known to support
the Pechenegs in their military campaigns against the Eastern Slavic
states.

Boniak was a Cuman khan who led a series of invasions on Kievan Rus′. In
1096 Boniak attacked Kiev, plundered the Kiev Monastery of the Caves,
and burned down the prince's palace in Berestovo. He was defeated in
1107 by Vladimir Monomakh, Oleg, Sviatopolk and other Rus′ princes.

The Mongol Empire invaded Kievan Rus' in the 13th century, destroying
numerous cities including Ryazan, Kolomna, Moscow, Vladimir and Kiev.
Giovanni de Plano Carpini, the Pope's envoy to the Mongol Great Khan,
traveled through Kiev in February 1246 and wrote:

> "They [the Mongols] attacked Russia, where they made great havoc,
> destroying cities and fortresses and slaughtering men; and they laid
> siege to Kiev, the capital of Russia; after they had besieged the city
> for a long time, they took it and put the inhabitants to death. When
> we were journeying through that land we came across countless skulls
> and bones of dead men lying about on the ground. Kiev had been a very
> large and thickly populated town, but now it has been reduced almost
> to nothing, for there are at the present time scarce two hundred
> houses there and the inhabitants are kept in complete slavery"

### Byzantine Empire

Byzantium quickly became the main trading and cultural partner for Kiev,
but relations were not always friendly. The most serious conflict
between the two powers was the war of 968–971 in Bulgaria, but several
Rus' raiding expeditions against the Byzantine cities of the Black Sea
coast and Constantinople itself are also recorded. Although most were
repulsed, they were concluded by trade treaties that were generally
favourable to the Rus'.

Rus'-Byzantine relations became closer following the marriage of the
*porphyrogenita* Anna to Vladimir the Great, and the subsequent
Christianization of the Rus': Byzantine priests, architects and artists
were invited to work on numerous cathedrals and churches around Rus',
expanding Byzantine cultural influence even further. Numerous Rus'
served in the Byzantine army as mercenaries, most notably as the famous
Varangian Guard.

### Military Campaigns

-   Caspian expeditions of the Rus' (864 - 1041)
-   Rus'–Byzantine Wars (830 - 1043)
-   1018 Polish intervention

Administrative divisions of Rus
-------------------------------

11th century

-   Novgorod Land 862–1478 the allied territory of Kievan Rus'; from
    1136 the Novgorod Republic
-   Principality of Rostov-Suzdal Rostov Principality until 1125; became
    Vladimir-Suzdal Principality in 1155
-   Principality of Polotsk 9th century-14th century (separatist
    territory, partial suzerainty under Kievan Rus')
    -   Principality of Minsk
-   Principality of Smolensk from 1054
-   Principality of Pereyaslavl
-   Principality of Volhynia
-   Principality of Kiev from 1132–1399
    -   Principality of Galicia
    -   Principality of Turov and Pinsk
-   Principality of Chernigov
    -   Murom-Ryazan Principality until 1078
    -   Principality of Novgorod-Seversk
-   City of Tmutarakan from 988 until some time in the 12th century
-   Belaya Vezha from 965 until some time in the 12th century
-   **Southern dependencies** Oleshky, New Galich, Peresechen'
-   Drevlian territories annexed to Rus' by Oleg ?-884; 912–946 (vassal
    of Rus' from 914, Drevlians Uprising in 945)

Principal cities
----------------

-   Kiev
-   Veliky Novgorod
-   Chernigov, capital along with Kiev from 1024–1036 (joint rule
    between Yaroslav and Mstislav)
-   Belgorod Kievsky, capital of Rus' under Rurik Rostislavich
-   Vyshgorod, princes' residence and royal library (at Mezhyhirya)
-   Polotsk
-   Rostov Veliky
-   Suzdal
-   Vladimir
-   Minsk, center of Principality of Minsk
-   Murom
-   Halych
-   Smolensk
-   Ryazan
-   Staraya Ladoga
-   Tmutarakan
-   Pereyaslavets, capital of Rus' from 969–971 (in current day Romania)

Religion
--------

In 988 the Christian Church in Rus' territorially fell under the
jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople after it
was officially adopted as the state religion. According to several
chronicles after that date the predominant cult of Slavic paganism was
persecuted.

It is uncertain the exact date of creation the Kiev Metropolitan as well
as who was the first leader of the church. Predominantly it is
considered that the first head was Michael I of Kiev, however some
sources also claim Leontiy who is often placed after Michael or Anastas
Chersonesos, became the first bishop of the Church of the Tithes. The
first metropolitan to be confirmed by historical sources is Theopemp,
who was appointed by Patriarch Alexius of Constantinople in 1038. Before
1015 there were five dioceses: Kiev, Chernihiv, Bilhorod, Volodymyr,
Novgorod, and soon thereafter Yuriy-upon-Ros. The Kiev Metropolitan sent
its own delegation to the Council of Bari in 1089.

After the sacking of Kiev in 1169, part of the Kiev metropolitan started
to move to Vladimir-upon-Klyazma, concluding the move sometime after
1240 when Kiev was taken by Batu Khan. Metropolitan Maxim was the first
metropolitan who chose Vladimir-upon-Klyazma as his official residence
in 1299. As a result, in 1303 Lev I of Galicia petitioned Patriarch
Athanasius I of Constantinople for the creation of a new Halych
metropolitan, however it only existed until 1347.

The first Cathedral Temple was chosen the Church of the Tithes. In 1037
the cathedral was transferred to the newly built Saint Sophia Cathedral
in Kiev. Upon the transferring of the metropolitan seat in 1299, the new
cathedral was chosen the Dormition Cathedral, Vladimir.

By the mid 13th century there were following dioceses of Kiev
Metropolitan (988): Kiev (988), Pereyaslav, Chernihiv (991),
Volodymyr-Volynsky (992), Turov (1005), Polotsk (1104), Novgorod
(\~990s), Smolensk (1137), Murom (1198), Peremyshl (1120), Halych
(1134), Vladimir-upon-Klyazma (1215), Rostov (991), Bilhorod, Yuriy
(1032), Chełm (1235), Tver (1271). There also were dioceses in
Zakarpattia and Tmutarakan. In 1261 the Sarai-Batu diocese was
established.
