The **Kingdom of Galicia** (; ; ; ) was a political entity located in
southwestern Europe, which at its territorial zenith occupied the entire
northwest of the Iberian Peninsula. Founded by Suebic king Hermeric in
409, the Galician capital was established in Braga, being the first
kingdom which adopted Catholicism officially and minted its own currency
(year 449). After the temporal rule of the Visigothic monarchs
(585–711), Galicia became a part of the newly founded Christian kingdoms
of the Northwest of the peninsula, Asturias and Kingdom of León|León,
while occasionally achieving independence under the authority of its own
kings.

Compostela became capital of Galicia in the 11th century, while the
independence of Portugal (1128) determined its southern boundary. The
accession of Castilian King Ferdinand III to the Leonese kingdom in 1230
brought Galicia under the control of the Crown of Castile, the kingdom
of Galicia becoming an administrative division within the larger realm.

Galicia resisted central control, supporting a series of alternative
claimants, including John of León, Galicia and Seville (1296), Ferdinand
I of Portugal (1369) and John of Gaunt (1386), and was not brought
firmly into submission until the Catholic Monarchs imposed the Santa
Hermandad in Galicia. The kingdom of Galicia was then administered
within the Crown of Castile (1490–1715) and later the Crown of Spain
(1715–1833) by an *Audiencia Real* directed by a Governor which holds
also the office of Captain General. The representative assembly of the
Kingdom was then the Junta or Cortes of the Kingdom of Galicia, which
briefly declared itself sovereign when Galicia alone remained free of
Napoleonic occupation (1808–1809). The kingdom and its *Junta* were
dissolved by Maria Cristina of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, Regent of Spain, in
1834.

Origin and foundation (410)
---------------------------

The origin of the kingdom lies in the 5th century, when the Suebi
settled permanently in the former Roman province of *Gallaecia*. Their
king, Hermeric, probably signed a *foedus*, or pact, with the Roman
Emperor Honorius, which conceded them lands in Galicia. The Suebi set
their capital in the former Bracara Augusta, setting the foundations of
a kingdom which was first acknowledged as *Regnum Suevorum* (Kingdom of
the Suebi), but later as *Regnum Galliciense* (Kingdom of Galicia).

A century later, the differences between Gallaeci and Suebi people had
faded, leading to the systematic use of terms like *Galliciense Regnum*
(Galician Kingdom), *Regem Galliciae* (King of Galicia), *Rege Suevorum*
(King of Suebi), and *Galleciae totius provinciae rex* (king of all
Galician provinces), while bishops, such as Martin of Braga, were
recognized as *episcopi Gallaecia* (Bishop of Galicia).

Suebic Kingdom (410–585)
------------------------

The independent Suebic kingdom of Galicia lasted from 410 to 585, having
remained a relatively stable for most of that time.

### 5th century

In 410 Gallaecia was divided, *ad habitandum*, among two Germanic
people, the Hasdingi Vandals, which settled the eastern lands, and the
Suebi, which established themselves in the coastal areas. As with most
Germanic invasions, the number of the original Suebi is estimated to be
relatively low, generally fewer than 100,000, and most often around
30,000 people. They settled mainly in the regions around modern northern
Portugal and Western Galicia, in the towns of Braga (*Bracara Augusta*)
and Porto, and later in Lugo (*Lucus Augusta*) and Astorga (*Asturica
Augusta*). The valley of the Limia (or Lima) River is thought to have
received the largest concentration of Germanic settlers, and Bracara
Augusta—the modern city of Braga—became the capital of the Suebi, as it
had previously been the capital of Gallaecia.

In 419 a war broke out between the Vandal king Gunderic and the Suebi's
Hermeric. After a blockade alongside the Nervasian Mountains, the Suebi
obtained Roman help, forcing the Vandals to flee into the Baetica. In
the absence of competitors, the Suebi began a period of expansion, first
inside Gallaecia, and later into other Roman provinces. In 438 Hermeric
ratified a peace treaty with the *Gallaeci*, the native and partially
Romanized people.

Illness led Hermeric to abdicate in favor of his son, Rechila, who moved
his troops to the south and the east, conquering Mérida, Spain|Mérida
and Seville, the capitals of the Roman provinces of Lusitania and
Betica. In 448 Rechila died, leaving the expanding state to his son
Rechiar, who in 449 became one of the first Germanic kings of post-Roman
Europe to converted to Catholicism. Rechiar married a Visigothic
princess, and was also the first Germanic king to mint coins in ancient
Roman territories. Rechiar led further expansions to the east, marauding
through the *Provincia Tarraconensis*, which was still held by Rome. The
Roman emperor Avitus sent a large army of *foederates*, under the
direction of the Visigoth Theoderic II, who defeated the Suebi army by
the river Órbigo, near modern day Astorga. Rechiar fled, but he was
pursued and captured, then executed in 457.

In the aftermath of Rechiar's death, multiple candidates for the throne
appeared, finally grouping into two allegiances. The division between
the two groups was marked by the Minius River (now Minho River),
probably as a consequence of the localities of the Quadi and Marcomanni
tribes, who constituted the Suebi nation on the Iberian Peninsula. The
Suebi in the north conquered Lugo, proceeding to use that city as their
co-capital, while the Suebi in the south expanded into Lisbon and
Conimbriga, which were assaulted, and abandoned after their Roman
inhabitants were banished. By 465 Remismund, who established a policy of
friendship with the Goths and promoted the conversion of his own people
into Arianism, was recognized by his people as the only king of the
Suebi.

### 6th century

After a period of obscurity, with very little remaining information on
the history of this area, or in fact Western Europe in general, the
Suebi Kingdom reappears in European politics and history during the
second half of the 6th century. This is following the arrival of Saint
Martin of Braga, a Pannonian monk dedicated to converting the Suebi to
Nicene Christianity and consequently into allegiance with the other
Nicene Christian regional powers, the Franks and the Eastern Roman
Empire.

Under King Ariamir, who called for the First Council of Braga, the
conversion of the Suebi to Nicene Christianity was apparent; while this
same council condemned Priscillianism, it made no similar statement on
Arianism. Later, King Theodemar ordered an administrative and
ecclesiastical division of his kingdom, with the creation of new
bishoprics and the promotion of Lugo, which possessed a large Suebi
community, to the level of Metropolitan Bishop along with Braga.

Theodemar's son and successor, King Miro, called for the Second Council
of Braga, which was attended by all the bishops of the kingdom, from the
Briton bishopric of Britonia in the Bay of Biscay, to Astorga in the
east, and Coimbra and Idanha in the south. Five of the attendant bishops
used Germanic names, showing the integration of the different
communities of the country. King Miro also promoted contention with the
Arian Visigoths, who under the leadership of King Leovigild were
rebuilding their fragmented kingdom which had been ruled mostly by
Ostrogoths since the beginning of the 6th century, following the defeat
and expulsion of Aquitania by the Franks. After clashing in frontier
lands, Miro and Leovigild agreed upon a temporary peace.

The Suebi maintained their independence until 585, when Leovigild, on
the pretext of conflict over the succession, invaded the Suebic kingdom
and finally defeated it. Audeca, the last king of the Suebi, who had
deposed his brother-in-law Eboric, held out for a year before being
captured in 585. This same year a nobleman named Malaric rebelled
against the Goths, but he was defeated.

As with the Visigothic language, there are only traces of the Suebi
tongue remaining, as they quickly adopted the local vulgar Latin. Some
words of plausible Suebi origin are the modern Galician and Portuguese
words *laverca* (lark), *meixengra* or *mejengra* (titmouse), *lobio*
(vine), *escá* (a measure, formerly "cup"), *groba* (ravine), and
others. Much more significant was their contribution to names of the
local toponymy and onomastics.

The historiography of the Suebi, and of Galicia in general, was long
marginalized in Spanish culture, with the first connected history of the
Suebi in Galicia being written by a German scholar.

Visigothic monarchy (585–711)
-----------------------------

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  "After the death of Miro king of Galicia, and while his son Eboric and his son-in-law Audeca were fighting each other for the control of the kingdom, Leovigild subjugated the Suebi and all of Galicia under the power of the Goths." Chronicle of Fredegar, III. p 116.
  "Not only the conversion of the Goths is found among the favors that we have received, but also the infinite multitude of the Sueves, whom with divine assistance we have subjected to our realm. Although led into heresy by others fault, with our diligence we have brought them to the origins of truth. Therefore, most holy fathers, these most noble nations gained by us, as a holy and atoning sacrifice, by your hands I offer to God eternal." King Reccared, [Acts of the Third Council of Toledo](http://www.pseudoisidor.mgh.de/html/107.htm).
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In 585, Liuvigild, the Visigothic king of Hispania and Septimania,
annexed the Kingdom of Galicia, after defeating King Audeca, and later
the pretender to the throne, Malaric. Thus the kingdom of the Suebi,
which incorporated large territories of the ancient Roman provinces of
Gallaecia and Lusitania, became the sixth province of the Visigothic
Kingdom of Toledo.

The government of the Visigoths in Galicia did not totally disrupt the
society, and the Suevi Catholic dioceses of Bracara, Dumio, Portus Cale
or Magneto, Tude, Iria, Britonia, Lucus, Auria, Asturica, Conimbria,
Lameco, Viseu, and Egitania continued to operate normally. During the
reign of Liuvigild, new Arian bishops were raised among the Suebi in
cities such as Lugo, Porto, Tui, and Viseu, alongside the cities'
Catholic bishops. These Arian bishops returned to Catholicism in 589,
when King Reccared himself converted to Catholicism, along with the
Goths and Suebi, at the Third Council of Toledo.

The territorial and administrative organization inherited from the Suevi
was incorporated into the new Provincial status, although Lugo was
reduced again to the category of bishopric, and subjected to Braga.
Meanwhile the Suevi, Roman, and Galician cultural, religious, and
aristocratic elite accepted new monarchs. The peasants maintained a
collective formed mostly by freemen and serfs of Celtic, Roman and Suebi
extraction, as no major Visigoth immigration occurred during the 6th and
7th centuries.

This continuity led to the persistence of Galicia as a differentiated
province within the realm, as indicated by the acts of several Councils
of Toledo, chronicles such as that of John of Biclar, and in military
laws such as the one extolled by Wamba which was incorporated into the
*Liber Iudicum*, the Visigothic legal code. It was not until the
administrative reformation produced during the reign of Recceswinth that
the Lusitanian dioceses annexed by the Suevi to Galicia (Coimbra,
Idanha, Lamego, Viseu, and parts of Salamanca) were restored to
Lusitania. This same reform reduced the number of mints in Galicia from
a few dozen to just three, those in the cities of Lugo, Braga, and Tui.

The most notable person of 7th century Galicia was Saint Fructuosus of
Braga. Fructuosus was the son of a provincial Visigoth *dux* (military
provincial governor), and was known for the many foundations he
established throughout the west of the Iberian peninsula, generally in
places with difficult access, such as mountain valleys or islands. He
also wrote two monastic rulebooks, characterized by their pact-like
nature, with the monastic communities ruled by an abbot, under the
remote authority of a bishop (*episcopus sub regula*), and each
integrant of the congregation having signed a written pact with him.
Fructuosus was later consecrated as abbot-bishop of Dumio, the most
important monastery of Gallaecia—founded by Martin of Braga in the 6th
century—under Suebi rule. In 656 he was appointed bishop of Braga and
metropolitan of Galicia, ostensibly against his own will.

During his later years the Visigothic monarchy suffered a pronounced
decline, due in large part to a decrease in trade and therefore a sharp
reduction in monetary circulation, largely as a result of the Muslim
occupations in the early 8th century in the south Mediterranean. The
Gallaecia were also affected, and Fructuosus of Braga denounced the
general cultural decline and loss of the momentum from previous periods,
causing some discontent in the Galician high clergy. At the tenth
Council of Toledo in 656, Fructuosus was appointed to the Metropolitan
seat of Potamio after the renunciation of its previous occupier. At the
same time the Will of the Bishop of Dume Recimiro was declared void
after he donated the wealth of the diocese convent to the poor.

The crisis at the end of the Visigoth era dates to the reign of Egica.
The monarch appointed his son Wittiza as his heir, and despite the fact
that the Visigothic monarchy had been traditionally elective rather than
hereditary Egica associated Wittiza during his lifetime to the throne
(for example, Egica and Wittiza are known to have issued coinage with
the confronted effigies of both monarchs). In 701 an outbreak of plague
spread westward from Greece to Spain, reaching Toledo, the Visigothic
capital, in the same year, and having such impact that the royal family,
including Egica and Wittiza, fled. It has been suggested that this
provided the occasion for sending Wittiza to rule the Kingdom of the
Suevi from Tui, which is recorded as his capital. The possibility has
also been raised that the 13th-century chronicler, Lucas of Tuy, when he
records that Wittiza relieved the oppression of the Jews (a fact unknown
from his reign at Toledo after his father), may in fact refer to his
reign at Lucas' hometown of Tui, where an oral tradition may have been
preserved of the events of his Galician reign.

In 702, with the death of Egica, Wittiza as sole king moved his capital
to Toledo. In 710, part of the Visigothic aristocracy violently raised
Roderic to the throne, triggering a civil war with the supporters of
Wittiza and his sons. In 711, the enemies of Roderic got a Muslim army
to cross the Straits of Gibraltar and face him at the Battle of
Guadalete. The defeat was the end of Roderic and of the Visigothic rule,
with profound consequences for the whole of the Iberian peninsula.

Early and High Middle Ages
--------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  "Alfonso king of Galicia and of Asturias, after having ravaged Lisbon, the last city of Spain, sent during the winter the insignias of his victory, breastplates, mules, and Moor prisoners, through his legates Froia and Basiliscus." Annales regni Francorum, c 798.
  "And so, as I've been told, when Adefonsus departed of this world, as Nepotianus usurped the kingdom of Ramiro, Ramiro went to the city of Lugo in Galicia, and there he reunited the army of the whole province. After a while he burst into Asturias. He was met by Nepotianus, who has reunited a group of Asturians and Basques, at the bridge over the river Narcea. Nepotianus was immediately left stranded by his own people, being captured when fleeing by two counts, Sonna and Scipio." Chronicle of Alfonso III, [ad Sebastianum](http://books.google.es/books?pg=RA1-PA20&id=3kbzgMG4_k0C&hl=en#v=onepage&q&f=false), 21.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

For several centuries after the defeat of the Goths, Galicia was united
with other neighboring regions under the same monarchs, with only brief
periods of separation under different kings. Along with the rest of the
northwest of the Iberian Peninsula, it was free of Arab presence from
the mid-8th century, being gradually incorporated into a growing
Christian state. This is usually called the Kingdom of Asturias in
traditional and modern sources, although the precise historical details
of these events have been obscured by the national myths leading to the
construction of modern Spanish identity.

The 9th century saw this state expand southward, with Castilian and
Asturian noblemen acquiring most of the northern Meseta, while in
Galicia, a similar impulse led to the conquest and re-population of the
regions of Astorga, southern Galicia, and northern Portugal down to
Coimbra, by noblemen mostly proceeding from northern Galicia. Also
significant was the discovery of the tomb of Saint James the Great at
what would become Santiago de Compostela; the shrine constructed there
became the religious center of the nation, as well as being the
destination of a major international pilgrimage route, the Way of St.
James. This increased the political and military relevance of Galicia,
and its noble families aspired to positions of power within the kingdom
through either military force or by matrimonial alliance with the royal
family. To the east, this southern expansion led the capital of the
Christian kingdom to be moved to the city of León (Spain)|León, from
which time the state is usually called the Kingdom of León. This same
kingdom was frequently known as either Gallaecia or Galicia (*Yillīqiya*
and *Galīsiya*) in Al-Andalus Muslim sources up to the 14th century, as
well as by many European Christian contemporaries.

### Society

During the Iron Age, and later during Roman and Germanic rule, Southern
Gallaecia—today north Portugal and south Galicia—was the more dynamic,
urbanized, and richest area of Gallaecia. This role was assumed by the
rural north during the Early and High Middle Ages, as a consequence not
only of the Islamic invasion, but as the final result of a continental
wide urban crisis.

The old bishoprics of Braga, Ourense, Tui, Lamego, and others, were
either discontinued, or re-established in the north, under the
protection of Lugo—which was now a stronghold due to its Roman walls—and
Iria. Dumio was re-established by the Bay of Biscay in Mondoñedo, Lugo
assumed the role of Braga, and the bishops of Lamego and Tui sought
refugee in Iria, where they received generous territorial grants. During
the 9th, 10th, and 11th centuries most of these bishoprics were
re-established in their historical sees, but at this time the bishops of
Lugo, Mondoñedo, and Iria became major political players; not just as
religious figures, but also as wealthy, and sometimes mighty secular
powers. In particular, the bishops of Iria and Compostela were notorious
warlords, due to the many fortresses and military resources they
controlled as heads of a military Norman mark, as well as due to the
wealth that the pilgrimages and royal grants brought to their lands.

Each bishopric was divided into a number of territories or counties,
named *terras*,*condados*, *mandationes*, *commissos*, or *territorios*
in local charters, which in the north were true continuations of the
Suebic dioceses which frequently preserved old tribal divisions and
denominations, such as *Lemabos, Celticos, Postamarcos, Bregantinos, and
Cavarcos*. Rights to the tax collection and government of each territory
was granted by the titular ruler—usually the king—to a count, bishopric,
or large monastery, although there existed some singularities. The
bishopric of Lugo was divided into counties, each one under the
government of an *infanzon* (a lesser nobleman) as a concession of the
bishop, while in the south, large and mighty territories such as the
*Portucalense* became hereditary, passed down to the descendants of the
9th century's conquerors. In the *Terra de Santiago* (Land of Saint
James, the fief of the bishops of Iria-Compostela) each territory was
administered by a bishop's vicar, while justice was administered by a
council composed of representatives of the local churchmen, knights, and
peasants.

Each territory or county could be further divided into *mandationes* and
*decanias*. The basic territorial division was the *villa*, centered on
a church, and composed of one or more hamlets or villages, together with
all its facilities, lands, and possessions. The *villas* perpetuated
ancient Roman and Suevic foundations, and they were the base for the
ecclesiastical organization, and for the economic production of the
country, later evolving into the modern *parroquias* and *freguesias*
(rural parishes). The local economy was subsistence, based mainly on the
production of grain and beans, and notably in cattle breeding. Other
valuable—though geographically restricted—products included fruits,
salt, wine, honey, olive oil, horses, iron for the production of weapons
and tools, and exotic oriental fabrics introduced from *Spania*. There
were also specialized artisans who worked on demand, such as masons and
goldsmiths.

While local commerce was common, long range interchanges—generally
maintained by Hebrew merchants—were rare and appreciated. Monetary
circulation was scarce, composed mainly of old Suebi and Visigothic
coinage known locally as *solidos gallicianos*. War and pillaging
against the thriving Al-Andalus was also a very important source for the
acquisition of riches, exotic items, and Muslim serfs. Later, pilgrimage
of Christians from all over Europe to Santiago de Compostela brought not
only riches, but also a range of continental innovations and trends,
from shipbuilding, to new architectural styles such as Romanesque art.

The elites were composed of counts, dukes, *senatores*, and other high
noblemen, who were frequently related by marriage with the monarch, and
who usually claimed the most powerful positions in society, either as
governors, bishops, or as palatine officials or companions of the king
or queen. The Galician nobility however were also frequently found as
rebels, either as supporters of a different candidate to the throne, or
aspiring to it themselves, or simply as disobedient to the king's orders
and will. At the service of the noblemen were *miles* (knights) and
*infanzones*; they were often found marching to war with their
subalterns on behalf of a patron, or as vicars and administrators.

A sizable section of the society were churchmen—presbyters, deacons,
clergymen, *lectors*, *confessos*, monks, and nuns—who frequently lived
in religious communities, some of which were composed of both men and
women living under vows of chastity and poverty. Most of these
monasteries were directed by an abbot or abbess, ruled under a pactual
tradition heavily influenced by Germanic legal traditions, with a bishop
*sub regula* as the highest authority of the community. Other
monasteries used different, sometimes antagonist rules. The Benedictine
and Augustine rules were uncommon until the 11th century. As in most of
Europe, the chartulary and chronicle proceedings of monasteries and
bishoprics are the most important source for the study of local history.

By the 12th century the only known bourgeois were the multinational
inhabitants of Compostela, by this stage a fortified and strong city.
Meanwhile, the City Council of Santiago for centuries had struggled
against their bishops for the recognition of a number of liberties. In
the country, most people were freemen, peasants, artisans, or
infantrymen, who could freely choose a patron, or buy and sell
properties, although they frequently fell prey to the greed of the big
owners, leading many of them to a life of servitude. Finally, *servos*,
*libertos*, and *pueros* (serfs and slaves), either obtained in war with
the Moors or through trial, constituted a visible part of the society;
they were employed as household workers (*domesticos* and *scancianes*),
shepherds, and farmhands. Local charters also show that, in time, they
were freed.

In terms of religion, most were Roman Catholics, although the local
rites—known today as Mozarabic rites—were notably different from those
used in most of Western Europe. No Arian, Priscillianist, or Pagan
organizations are known to have survived during the High Middle Ages.
However there were still pagans and pagan shrines in the Bierzo region
during the 7th century, whilst Arian or Priscillianist tonsure—seen as
long hair, with only a partial tonsure atop the head—was in use in
Galicia up to 681, when it was forbidden at a council in Toledo. There
were no known Muslim communities in Galicia and northern Portugal, other
than Moor serfs. Records of Hebrew people are also uncommon in local
charters until the 12th century, except as travelers and merchants.

Personal names in Galicia and northern Portugal were chiefly of Germanic
origin, although Christian, Roman, and Greek names were also common.
Names were usually composed just of a single surname, although noblemen
frequently also used a patronymic. Muslim names and patronymics were
rare amongst Galicians, as even serfs were frequently given a Germanic
or Roman name, which is in contrast with the relative popularity of
Muslim names amongst the Leonese.

### Interludes of independence: 10th and 11th centuries

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  "When Fruela II of León|Fruela, king of Galicia, died (...) the Christians made king his brother Alfonso IV of León|Alfonso, who then found the throne disputed by his elder brother Sancho I Ordóñez|Sancho, who entered León, capital of the Kingdom of the Galicians, as an opponent (...) Until they decided to depose Sancho and to throw him from Leon, joining under the king Alfonso. Sancho then fled to the extreme of Galicia, where he was received and enthroned by the locals." Ibn Hayyan, *Muqtabis*, V, c. 1050.
  "I Answar, to you, our lord and most serene king Sancho I Ordóñez|Don Sancho, prince of all Galicia, and to our lady, your wife, queen Goto." Document from the *chartulary of Celanova*, year 929.
  "There king Don Sancho said (...) 'Don Alfonso VI of León|Alfonso, our father because of our sins left the land poorly divided, and he gave to Don Garcia most of the realm, and thou were left the most disinherited and with less lands; and that's why I propose to take from king Don Garcia the land our father gave to him.'" *Primera Crónica General de España*, 817.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

When Alfonso III of León was forced by his sons to abdicate in 910, his
lands were partitioned, bringing about the first episode of a
short-lived distinct kingdom of Galicia. García I of León|García I
obtained the *Terra de Fora* or Kingdom of León|León, consisting of the
southeastern portion of their father's realm, while Ordoño II of
León|Ordoño II held the western lands, that is Galicia (including the
recently acquired lands of Coimbra) where he had already been serving as
governor, and was now recognized as king in an assembly of magnates held
in Lugo. The youngest brother, Fruela II of León|Fruela II, received the
Asturian heartland in the northeast, with Oviedo as its capital.

From Galicia, Ordoño launched several successful raids on the Islamic
south, returning with riches and Muslim serfs, and confirming himself as
an able commander. At the death of García in 914, Ordoño also acquired
León, and on his death in 924 his younger brother, Fruela, reunited
Alfonso's realm. Fruela's death a year later initiated a period of
chaos, with several claimants to the crown. Fruela's son, Alfonso
Fróilaz, received support from Asturias, but was captured and blinded by
Sancho I Ordóñez|Sancho, Alfonso IV of León|Alfonso IV, and Ramiro II of
León|Ramiro II, sons of Ordoño, with the aid of the Basque troops of
Jimeno Garcés of Pamplona. Vague and conflicting historical records make
it uncertain whether Alfonso Fróilaz reigned briefly as king of the
entire kingdom, or simply held a remote part of Asturias. In Galicia,
Sancho succeeded, being crowned in Santiago de Compostela and marrying a
Galician noblewoman. After reigning for just three years he died
childless. Alfonso IV then took control of an again-reunited Kingdom of
León in 929, however was forced into a monastery by their youngest
brother, Ramiro, two years later.

Ramiro II had ties with the Galician nobility through kinship, marriage
and patronage, and he and his son, Ordoño III of León|Ordoño III, whose
mother was Galician, reigned with their support. This was not the case
when Ordoño was succeeded by his half-brother Sancho I of León in 956.
Sancho proved unpopular and ineffectual and the Galician nobles grew
fractious, forming a coalition with Fernán González of Castile to
overthrow Sancho in favor of Ordoño IV of León|Ordoño IV, who was
enthroned in Santiago de Compostela in 958. However Sancho reclaimed the
crown in 960 with support from his mother's Kingdom of Pamplona, the
Leonese nobility, and Muslim assistance. His son, Ramiro III of
León|Ramiro III, grew increasingly absolutist, alienating the Galician
nobility who also resented the lack of Leonese help when the Normans
raided Galicia from 968 through 970.

The Galician nobility again rose in rebellion, in 982 crowning and
anointing Bermudo II of León|Bermudo, son of Ordoño III of León|Ordoño
III, as king in Santiago de Compostela. With their support, he first
repelled the army of Ramiro in the battle of *Portela de Areas* and
eventually made himself undisputed ruler of the Leonese kingdom. Once in
control, Bermudo lost many of his Galician and Portugueses supporters by
repudiating his Galician wife in favor of a new marriage alliance with
Castile. His later reign was marked by the ascension of a strong
military leader, Almanzor, who led a brief resurgence of the Cordoban
Caliphate, reconquering Coimbra or Viseu, and even raiding Santiago de
Compostela.

In the 1030s, Galicia became the sole holdout to the Leonese conquests
of Sancho III of Pamplona. When the Count of Castile—nominally a Leonese
vassal, but *de facto* independent—was assassinated in León in 1029,
Sancho claimed the right to name the successor, giving it to his own son
Ferdinand I of León and Castile|Ferdinand. Taking advantage of the youth
of Leonese king Bermudo III of León|Bermudo III, Sancho seized disputed
border regions, formalizing the arrangement by including the lands in
the dowry of Bermudo's sister, who was married to Ferdinand in 1032. Two
years later, in 1034, Sancho took Bermudo's capital, becoming *de facto*
ruler of most of the kingdom, whilst leaving Bermudo to rule from his
refuge in Galicia. Sancho's death the next year allowed Bermudo to
regain not only the entire kingdom, but to briefly become overlord of
Ferdinand's Castile. However, in 1037, the Castilian count killed
Bermudo in battle, and Galicia passed with the Kingdom of León into the
hands of Ferdinand, who then had himself crowned king.

`around 1065:`\

]]

Ferdinand's death in 1065 led to another short-lived Galician state. In
1063 he had opted to partition his realm, giving the eastern Kingdom of
Castile to his eldest son, Sancho II of León and Castile|Sancho II,
along with the right to the *paria* (tribute) from the Taifa of
Zaragoza. His second son Alfonso VI of León and Castile|Alfonso VI was
given the Kingdom of León, representing the central portion of the old
realm, with the *paria* from Toledo. His youngest son, García II of
Galicia|García II, who had been educated in Galicia under the tutelage
of bishop Cresconius of Compostela, received the western half of
Bermudo's old kingdom as King of Galicia, along with the right to
*parias* from the Taifas of Badajoz and Seville.

As king, Garcia aimed to restore the old episcopal sees of Tui, Lamego,
and Braga, which had been dissolved due to Arab and Viking assaults. The
death of two of his most notable supporters, bishops Cresconius of
Compostela and Uistrarius of Lugo, left the young king in a weaker
position, and in 1071 the Count of Portugal, Nuno Mendes, rose in
rebellion. García defeated and killed him in the same year at the Battle
of Pedroso, and in recognition of his solidified control adopted the
title King of Galicia and Portugal. However his brothers, Alfonso and
Sancho, immediately turned on the victor, forcing García to flee, first
to central Portugal and later—after defeating him near Santarém,
Portugal|Santarém—into exile in Seville in 1072. García's realm was
divided, with Alfonso joining the county of Portugal to his Kingdom of
León, while Sancho held the north.

This situation was inherently unstable, with Sancho's lands separated by
Alfonso's León, and the two soon fought a war in which Sancho proved
victorious, forcing Alfonso into exile and reuniting all of Ferdinand's
kingdom except the autonomous city of Zamora, held by his sister Urraca.
While besieging this town in 1072, Sancho was assassinated, inducing
Alfonso to return and claim the entire realm. García also returned in
1073 from his exile, either with the hope of re-establishing himself in
Galicia, or simply having been misled by promises of safety from
Alfonso, however he was imprisoned by Alfonso for the rest of his life,
dying in 1091. As an aftermath to these events, before 1088 Alfonso
deposed the bishop of Compostela, Diego Pelaez, who was charged "on
trying to deliver the Kingdom of Galicia ["Galleciae Regnum"] to the
king of the English and of the Normans [William the Conqueror], while
taking it away from the kings of the Spaniards". This reunion with the
Kingdom of León would prove permanent, although both kingdoms maintained
their separate personality.

### Raymond of Burgundy

In 1091 the daughter of King Alfonso VI of León and Castile|Alfonso VI,
*infanta* Urraca of León and Castile|Urraca, married a Burgundian
nobleman, Raymond of Burgundy, who had participated in the Crusades
against the Almoravids. His military victories as well as his Anscarid
lineage justified this union, and Alfonso bestowed on him the government
of Galicia between Cape Ortegal and Coimbra, as a personal fief. This
union gave rise to the House of Burgundy, which would rule in Galicia,
León, and Castile until the death of king Pedro I of Castile.

Two years after Raymond's marriage, in 1093, another French crusader,
his cousin Henry, the grandson of Duke Robert I of Burgundy and nephew
of Alfonso's queen, was given the hand of the Alfonso's illegitimate
daughter Theresa, receiving lands in Castille. Both Burgundians were
close allies in the affairs of the realm, ratifying a pact of friendship
where Raymond promised his cousin to give to him the Kingdom of Toledo
or the Kingdom of Galicia, together with a third of his treasure, in
return for Henry's aid in acquiring the crown as successor of King
Alfonso. However, by 1097 King Alfonso granted Henry the counties of
Portugal and Coimbra, from the river Minho to the Tagus, thus limiting
the powers of Raymond, who by this time was securing an important
nucleus of partisans in Galicia, including Pedro Fróilaz de Traba|Count
Pedro Fróilaz de Traba, whilst appointing his own notary, Diego
Gelmírez, as bishop of Compostela. In successive years he also obtained
the government of Zamora, Salamanca, and Ávila, Spain|Ávila, but he died
in 1107, two years before King Alfonso, who was now in his seventies.
The government of Galicia and their other possessions was retained by
Alfonso's widow, Urraca, who styled herself Mistress and Empress of
Galicia. King Alfonso, in a council held in León, asked of the magnates
of Galicia to swear an oath on the defense of the rights of his
grandson, Alfonso Raimúndez, to the kingdom of Galicia, in case his
mother Urraca remarried.

On June 30, 1109, King Alfonso VI died. He was succeeded by Queen
Urraca, who remarried in 1109 to the king of Aragon, Alfonso the
Battler, a soldier by nature who was immediately received as king in
Castille and León, but not in Galicia. As part of the marriage
settlement, any children born to the union were to have priority over
Raymond's son Alfonso in the succession. In Galicia this union was
rejected by the old party of count Raymond, now led by count Pedro
Fróilaz, tutor of young Alfonso, although the partisans of Urraca also
joined forces. With Leon and Castille quiet and under control, Alfonso
moved on Galicia in 1110, and while he did not suffer any major defeat,
he had little success, returning three months later to León. Probably as
a consequence to this development, Pedro Froila drew Diego Gelmirez to
his party. In 1111, the young Alfonso Raimúndez was crowned and anointed
king in Compostela.

### Separation of the County of Portugal (1128)

On the death of Henry in 1112, his widow Theresa succeeded him as head
of the two Counties of Portugal and Coimbra, during the minority of her
son, Afonso Henriques. Two trends emerged at this time, firstly a policy
of rapprochement with the new King Alfonso VII of León and
Castile|Alfonso VII, and secondly the maintenance of their power with
the aim that the heir to the county would be proclaimed king. The
increasing importance of Santiago de Compostela—now metropolitan church
of Lusitania, which was in open competition with Braga, metropolitan
church of Galicia—and the support for Theresa's rule north of the Miño
brought about by her romantic union with Fernando Pérez de Traba altered
the *status quo*. The Archbishop of Braga, who had suffered the
nocturnal theft of the relics of Fructuosus of Braga by Diego Gelmirez
in 1102, and the major Portuguese aristocrats who were pursuing a larger
territorial authority, gave support to the royal pretensions of Afonso
Henriques. Given this situation, King Alfonso VII marched on Portugal,
taking first Tui and other territories north of the river Minho, later
besieging Guimarães and obtaining the submission of the Portuguese.

Several months later, in 1128, inspired by the shortcomings of Afonso
Henriques, the Galician and Portuguese troops of Theresa and Fernando
Perez de Trava entered Portugal, but the men of Afonso scored a decisive
victory at the Battle of São Mamede. The later death of Theresa, and
Afonso's success against the Moors at the Battle of Ourique, led to him
being proclaimed King of the Portuguese in 1139, this independence being
recognized by the king of León in 1143. Still, the statute of frontier
lands such as Toroño and Limia in southern Galicia led to frequent
border conflicts during most of the Lower Middle Ages.

### Compostelan Era (1111–1230)

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Excerpts from the *Historia Compostelana***
  *The laws, the rights, the peace, the justice, called the Galician to arms; everything which is wrong threw the Aragonese into every kind of crime.* HC, I.87
  *Oh shame! The Castilians need foreign forces and are protected by the audacity of the Galicians. What will become of these coward knights when the army of Galicia, their shield and protection, is gone?.* HC, I.90
  *Shipbuilders came from Genoa to Compostela, they presented themselves to the bishop and they reached and agreement for building two ships at a fixed price. It can be guessed the utility of the matter and the joy of the seashore dwellers, and even of all the Galicians, because of the freedom and the protection of the fatherland.* HC, I.103.
  *The queen hurried coming to Galicia to reconcile with the bishop; because she knew that through him she could keep or lose the kingdom of Galicia, because the bishop and the church of Compostela is capital and looking glass of Galicia.* HC, I.107.
  *«The king Don Alfonso, my grandparent, put the condition that in case the queen, my mother, was to stay as a widows, all the kingdom of Galicia would stay under her domain; but if she ever married, the kingdom of Galicia would return to me.»* HC I.108
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At Santiago de Compostela on September 17, 1111 the Galician high
nobility crowned Alfonso VII of León and Castile|Alfonso VII, the son of
Raymond and Urraca, as king of Galicia, and he was anointed by bishop
Diego Gelmírez; the coronation was led by Pedro Fróilaz de Traba, who
had been Alfonso's mentor throughout his childhood. The coronation was
intended to preserve the rights of the son of Raymond of Burgundy in
Galicia, at a time when Urraca effectively delivered the kingdoms of
Castile and León to her new husband, Alfonso the Battler of Aragon and
Navarre.

The ceremony in Compostela was more symbolic than effective, and Diego
Gelmírez, Pedro Fróilaz, and other Galician nobles headed first to Lugo,
and later to the royal seat in León to enthrone Alfonso VII there.
However, they were intercepted at Viadangos, near León, by the troops of
Alfonso the Battler. The Galician knights charged, but they were
outnumbered and surrounded by the Aragonese infantry, who defeated the
Galicians and frustrated their plans. Pedro Fróilaz was taken prisoner,
whilst other nobles were killed, but bishop Gelmírez managed to escape,
delivering his protégé, the young king, to his mother, who began acting
against her new husband. From then until Alfonso VII came of age and
Urraca died, the entire realm lived under a constant state of civil war,
experiencing frequent seizures and shifting alliances between mother and
child, and between Urraca and her Aragonese husband. This same civil war
was evident in the kingdom of Galicia, were partisans of Diego Gelmirez,
of Pedro Fróilaz, and of other nobles and warlords, found themselves
battling each other either as defenders of either Queen Urraca or King
Alfonso VII, or under their own agenda, whilst Alfonso of Aragón and
Theresa of Portugal also had their own supporters.

With Calixtus II, uncle of Alfonso VII, becoming Pope, Diego Gelmírez
secured the elevation of Compostela into an archdiocese in 1120 through
a steady flow of generous donations sent to Rome. Bishop Diego attempted
to gain the recognition of Compostela as the primate of Spain, but
failed against Toledo, the old Visigoth capital. Later he claimed the
recognition as the metropolitan church of the Kingdom of Galicia,
against the rights of the church of Braga, metropolitan since at least
the days of Martin of Dumio. Calixtus II did not approve Gelmirez's
claims, but finally decided to enlarge Compostela's jurisdiction into an
anomalous situation in which Compostela exercised power not over its
geographical location of the Galician territories, but over the old
jurisdiction of Mérida, Spain|Mérida, the old metropolitan church of
Lusitania, which was then under Muslim control without a bishop.
Consequently, the bishops of Coimbra, Lamego, Viseu, or Salamanca, among
others, were subjected to the rule of Compostela. Braga, metropolitan of
the cities of Galicia other than Compostela, found itself limited by the
jurisdiction of the later, becoming the centre of the movement for the
independence of Portugal. In 1128 the leader of the Galician nobility,
Fernando Peres de Trava, together with his lover Countess Theresa of
Portugal, who were acting with absolute liberty in most of Galicia and
Portugal, were defeated by Afonso Henriques, Theresa's son. This was the
foundation of the future kingdom of Portugal.

On his death in 1156, Alfonso VII of León and Castile|Alfonso VII
divided his domains, pressured by the Castilian and the Galician nobles,
bequeathing León and Galicia to his second son, Ferdinand II of
León|Ferdinand II. Ferdinand, who had been using the title of *King of
Galicia* at least since 1152, had been as a child ward of the
influential Count Fernando Peres de Trava, heir and son of Count Pedro
Fróilaz, who in turn had been tutor of Alfonso VII. In 1158 the death of
his brother Sancho III of Castile permitted him to intervene the
Castilian internal affairs, which led him to use the title *Rex
Hispaniarum*. In his own realm, he continued his father's policies by
granting *Cartas Póvoa* or *Foros* (constitutional charters) to towns
such as Padrón, Ribadavia, Noia, Pontevedra and Ribadeo, most of them
possessing important harbors or sited in rich valleys. Thus he promoted
the growth of the bourgeoisie and impulsed local economy through the
expansion of commerce. He also contributed to the economic and artistic
development of the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, at least after
the death of bishop Martin in 1168, and under the rule of two of his
closest subjects, bishops Pedro Gudesteiz and Pedro Suárez de Deza.
Ferdinand died in 1188, in Benavente, leaving two main pretenders to the
throne: his sons Sancho, born of a Castilian noblewoman; and Alfonso,
son of the first wife of Fernando Urraca of Portugal. Alfonso, supported
by the Galician nobility and by the archbishop of Compostela Pedro
Suárez de Deza, hasted to Santiago de Compostela carrying the remains of
his father, and proclaiming himself King there. In contrast with the
later, he dropped the title of "King of the Spains", whilst preferring
the use of "King of León" and "King of León and Galicia".

Alfonso IX's long reign was characterized by his rivalry with Castile
and Portugal, and by the promotion of the royal power at the expense of
the church and of the nobility, whilst maintaining his father policies
intended to urbanize the realm. He was one of the first European
monarchs to ever call for a general council, summoning not only the
nobility and the Church, but also the inhabitants of the towns and
cities, as a precedent to modern representative parliaments. The last
years of his reign were also marked by the conquest of large areas of
what is now Extremadura (including the cities of Cáceres, Spain|Cáceres,
Mérida, Spain|Mérida and Badajoz) then in the hands of the Almohad
Caliphate, a territory also wanted by the Portuguese.

Alfonso granted constitutional charters to the towns of Betanzos, A
Coruña, Baiona, Salvaterra de Miño, Verín, Monforte de Lemos, O
Valadouro, Milmanda, Bo Burgo de Castro Caldelas, Melide, A
Coruña|Melide, Sarria and Triacastela, sited in good harbors along the
Galician coastline, by the Miño river, or at major crossroads in the
country. These new *reguengo* villages (royal villages under direct
royal political and economical control, and administered by their
autonomous city councils), each one usually known as a *burgo* due to
its walled circuits, constituted important attraction points for
peasants, who could find better life conditions under the direct
protection of the king than abroad under the authority of a bishop, a
monastery or a nobleman; but they also attracted foreigners, most
notably artisans and merchants, who brought new trends and knowledges.
These burgs supposed a revolution in the social structure of the time,
leading to economic diversification, removing the dominant autarky of
the previous centuries, and facilitating the development of fishing and
pre-industrial activities oriented toward the mass production of some
resources, especially salted and dried fish, fish oil, and wine,
marketed through the seaports north to England, and south to the
Mediterranean.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  'I, Alfonso, by the grace of God King of León and of Galicia, by this writing, which is to be forever valid (...) I grant and confirm to the town council of Bayona, that is, Erizana, the rights and 'foros' or customs for they to live, and to have, and to direct their town in justice, and so the small people with the greater one, and the greater people with the small one, there forever they may live in peace and quietly...'
  *Foro* or Constitutional Charter of Baiona, 1201.
  'We must also consider that there are five kingdoms among the Spaniards, namely that of Aragon, that of the Navarrese, and that of those who specifically are named Spaniards, which capital is Toledo, as well as those of the inhabitants of Galicia and Portugal'
  *Narratio de Itinere Navali Peregrinorum Hierosolymam Tendentium et Silviam Capientium, AD. 1189*.
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this cities and villages the emergence of an associative movement led
to the creation of permanent city councils, and to the association of
artisan in guilds or *confrarías*, which would in time acquire a
religious hue just to avoid being banned or punished in their
patrimonies. This new burgs also allowed a number of minor noble houses
to consolidate power by occupying the new administrative and political
jobs and offices, in open competence with the new classes: mayors,
aldermen (*regedores*, *alcaldes*, *justiças*), agents and other
officials (*procuradores*, *notarios*, *avogados*) and judges (*juizes*)
of the town council; or *mordomos* and *vigarios* (leader and deputies)
of the diverse guilds.

Throughout this century there was also a rapid growth of the rural
population, resulting in a larger force of farm labor which consequently
allowed the great monasteries to develop new agricultural lands. This,
coupled with the improvement of farming equipment and techniques, such
as the introduction of the heavy wheeled plough, resulted in an increase
in productivity that impacted the people's lifestyles. The distribution
of this increased productivity between peasants and lords was regulated
by the establishment of *foros* or lifelong contracts, frequently
spanning several generations or *vozes*. The economic and social
transformations led to profound changes in mindset. In the towns, it
initiated a religious and intellectual renewal under the mendicant
orders, most notably the Franciscans, who instituted social reforms.

Compostela, "capital and looking glass" of the Kingdom of Galicia,
became a showcase of this thriving era, reflected in Master Matthew's
work in the granite of the Cathedral of Santiago de
Compostela—especially in the *Portico da Gloria* and in Prateria's
façade—demonstrating a prosperity also witnessed through the numerous
surviving Romanesque buildings in Galicia. This period is also
responsible for Latin literary creations such as the *Codex Calixtinus*
and the *Historia Compostellana*. The *Historia* is an extensive
chronicle on the deeds of the bishop of Compostela, Diego Gelmirez, and
though partisan, it is a source of great significance for the
understanding of the contemporary events and of the Galician society in
the first half of the 12th century.

### Union under the Crown of Castile (1230)

In the early Medieval era, a fluid pattern of union and division was
observed among the states of Christian Iberia. While marriage of royals
had resulted in the union of some of these states—for example between
Navarre and Aragon, and Castile and León—subsequent divisions amongst
heirs created a dynamic pattern of union and separation. However, the
12th century initiated a series of unions that would prove permanent.

Alfonso IX married twice. From his first marriage to Teresa of Portugal
he had a son, Ferdinand, and two daughters, Sancha and Aldonza. From his
second marriage to Berengaria of Castile, he had five children; Eleanor,
who died as a child, a second Ferdinand, Alfonso, Berengaria of
León|Berengaria, and Constance. The death of Alfonso IX's son from his
first marriage, Ferdinand, in 1214 left the younger Ferdinand, from his
second marriage, as heir to his father. When the Castilian king, Henry
I, died in 1217 and Berengaria ceded her rights to her son, Ferdinand
became King of Castile, against the will of his father.

To preserve the independence of his realm, Alfonso IX applied customary
Galician-Leonese inheritance to nominate Aldonza as future Queen of
Galicia, and Sancha as Queen of León, enlisting their uncle Afonso II of
Portugal to support their succession. Alfonso died in 1230 in Sarria,
while on pilgrimage to Santiago de Compostela to thank the apostle for
his help in the conquest of Extremadura, and his body was taken there
for burial. Most of the Leonese nobility cleaved to Ferdinand, who also
gained the support of the new Portuguese king, Sancho II. After clashes
in León and Galicia, Alfonso IX's two former wives, Berengaria and
Theresa, reached an agreement whereby Theresa induced Aldonza and Sancha
to abandon their regal claims in exchange for an annuity. As a result,
Ferdinand III became successor to Alfonso's kingdoms of León and
Galicia, bringing about a permanent union into what would come to be
called the Crown of Castile, wherein the kingdoms continued as
administrative entities under the unified rule of a single monarch.

Late Middle Ages
----------------

### Emergence of the Galician language

Latinate Galician charters from the 8th century onward show that the
local written Latin was heavily influenced by local spoken romance, yet
is not until the 12th century that we find evidences for the
identification of the local language as a language different from Latin
itself. During this same 12th century we can find full Galician
sentences being inadvertently used inside Latin texts, whilst its first
reckoned use as a literary language dates to the last years of the 12th
century.

The linguistic stage from the 13th to the 15th centuries is usually
known as Galician-Portuguese (or *Old Portuguese*, or *Old Galician*) as
an acknowledgement of the cultural and linguistic unity of Galicia and
Portugal during the Middle Ages, as both linguistic varieties differed
only in dialectal minor phenomenons, and were considered by the
contemporary as just one language.

This language flourished during the 13th and 14th centuries as a
language of culture, developing a rich lyric tradition of which some
2000 compositions (*cantigas*, meaning 'songs') have been preserved—a
few hundreds even with their musical score—in a series of collections,
and belonging to four main genres: *Love songs* where a man sings for
his love, *Cantiga de amigo* where a woman sings for her boyfriend,
crude, taunting and sexual *Songs of Scorn*, and religious songs.

Its most notable patrons—themselves reputed authors—were kings Dom Dinis
in Portugal, and Alfonso X the Learned in Galicia, who was a great
promoter of both Galician and Castilian Spanish languages. Not just the
kings encouraged literary creation in Galician-Portuguese, but also the
noble houses of Galicia and Portugal, as being an author or bringing
reputed troubadours into one's home became a way of promoting social
prestige; as a result many nobleman, businessmen and clergymen of the
13th and 14th centuries became notable authors, such as Paio Gomes
Charinho, lord of Rianxo, and the aforementioned kings.

Aside from the lyric genres, Galicia developed also a minor tradition on
literary prose, most notably in translation of European popular series,
as those dealing with king Arthur written by Chretien de Troyes, or
those based on the war of Troy, usually paid and commissioned by
noblemen who desired to read those romances in their own language. Other
genres include history books (either translation of Spanish ones, or
original creations like the *Chronicle of St. Mary of Iria*, by Rui
Vasques), religious books, legal studies, and a treaty on horse
breeding. Prose literary creation in Galician had stopped by the 16th
century, when printing press became popular; the first complete
translation of the Bible was not printed until the 20th century.

As for other written uses of Galician, legal charters (last wills,
hirings, sales, constitutional charters, city council book of acts,
guild constitutions, books of possessions, and any type of public or
private contracts and inventories) written in Galicia are to be found
from 1230 to 1530—the earliest one a document from the monastery of
Melon, dated in 1231—being Galician by far the most used language during
the 13th, 14th and 15th centuries, in substitution of Latin.

Whilst the written use of Castilian in Galicia was common since 1400, at
least in the documents issued by the offices of foreigners established
in the country, since 1500 the open substitution of Galician elites by
Castilian officials led to the progressive discrimination of Galician
language and even of Galician people, although public inscriptions in
tombstones and foundations were still common during much of the 16th
century. These developments led to the apparition of a series of
literary and historical works which goal was the vindication of Galician
history, language, people and culture, most notably during the 17th and
18th centuries.

Later Galician language would become a regional language, with just
minor literary use up to the 19th century, when a thriving literature
developed. As Galician had no official recognition, no legal Galician
documents were issued again up to the last quarter of the 20th century.

### Galicia and the Castilian Crown

The rule of Ferdinand III initiated a gradual decline in the influence
of Galicia in the politics of state, in which the aristocracy and the
Galician city councils would lose power to the local bishops. Galicia
found itself on the periphery of the enlarged kingdom, which was largely
ruled from Toledo or Seville, and increasingly controlled by Castilians.
The royal court abandoned Compostela and began a policy of
centralization. Despite this, Galician nobles and bishops continued to
exercise a degree of autonomy from the Castilian crown until the time of
the Catholic Monarchs.

In 1231 Fernando established in his newly acquired kingdoms the figure
known in Galicia as *meyrino maor*, a high official and personal
representative of the king himself, in 1251 substituted by an
*adelantado mayor* (*endeantado maior*, in Galician language), with even
larger attributions. These officials were established in each one of the
three old Christian kingdoms (Galicia, León and Castile); in the vassal
Kingdom of Murcia; and in the frontier with the Muslims, 'La Frontera'.
During the 13th and the 14th centuries this position was occupied either
by local noblemen—such as Estevan Fernandes de Castro, Paio Gomes
Chariño, or Afonso Suares de Deza—or by members of the royal family as
the *infante* Felipe, son of Sancho IV, thus maintaining a state of
fluid relations and communications between the Crown and the Kingdom,
which would prove fruitful during the conquest and colonization of
Seville and other Andalusian cities.

Ferdinand's policy of centralization was continued during the reign of
his son Alfonso X; during a period of unrest in Compostela, with the
city council confronted with the archbishop, he introduced an *alcalde*
or representative of the Crown into the local government, later
delivering the see of Compostela to a Castilian, after forcing
archbishop Gonsalvo Gomes to flee to France; thus starting a process
that eventually led to the replacement of Galician bishops, abbots and
noblemen, by Castilians during 15th, 16th, and successive centuries.
Anyway, and in contrast with his father, he again usually favoured the
bourgeois through the concession of numerous constitutional charters to
new towns, angering the nobility.

While the Castilian (Castile-Toledo) and Leonese (Galicia and León)
crowns were linked in the person of the king, both crowns retained
political peculiarities. Galicia and León retained the legal code *Liber
Iudicium* and their own parliament (*Cortes*), whilst the public
charters within the kingdom of Galicia continued to be written in
Galician, however documents from the royal court were issued only in
Castilian. Anyway, the creation in 1282 of a joint Brotherhood (league)
of the Kingdoms of León and Galicia showed the existence of a grade of
unrest in the old western kingdoms of the Crown.

### John, king of León, Galicia and Seville (1296–1301)

The reign of Alfonso X ended in civil war and political instability
regarding the succession. The death of his eldest son Ferdinand de la
Cerda led Ferdinand's younger brother, Sancho, to rebel in a bid to
secure the succession, which was ultimately successful. A similar
pattern then followed Sancho's own death in 1295, with the reign of his
juvenile son Ferdinand IV of Castile being contested by his uncle John,
who had been in revolt since 1286.

With the help of King Denis I of Portugal, John—who lived exiled in
Granada—advanced to Badajoz as pretender to the throne of Castile, but
negotiations with Ferdinand's party, together with the assassination of
his closest ally the *adelantado mayor* of Galicia Paio Gómez Charinho,
led him to renounce to this goal. Anyway, in 1296 John took the lead of
the nobility of the old Leonese crown, and with the support of the kings
of Aragon and Portugal was proclaimed king of León and Galicia in 1296,
a claim which also included the Kingdom of Seville, historically a
vassal of Galicia since the 11th century. Charinho was succeeded by
Fernando Ruíz de Castro, a kinsman of the house of Traba, whose wife
also supported John and was the source of political activity calling for
a rapprochement with Portugal.

This attempted secession lasted five years amid great political and
military instability due to opposition from many sectors of society, as
well as the party of Sancho's widow Maria de Molina, supported by the
Castilian nobility, and the high Galician clergy. Faced with this
resistance, King Dom Denis of Portugal proposed to Queen Maria de Molina
that John should held for him and for his heirs the Kingdom of Galicia,
where he counted with the strong support of Fernando Ruiz de Castro and
other noblemen, thus granting him the title of King. In 1301, after
losing the support of the King of Portugal, John was forced to abandon
his claim to sovereignty in exchange for a number of minor titles, thus
confirming the unity of the Crown of Castile.

### Unrest in the cities

After John's challenge, the king decided to send into Galicia his
brother Don Felipe, as Adelantado Mayor, later obtaining also the title
of *Pertigueiro Maior*, or first minister and commander of the *Terra de
Santiago*. For near thirty years he would act as *alter ego* of the
king, closely supported by the local nobility.

The beginning of the 14th century was characterized by the civil unrest
in the cities of the kingdom, most notably in Lugo, Tui, Ourense and
Compostela, originated in the aspiration of their city councils to
become *reguengas*, that is, to become a direct dependency of the king,
and as such virtually autonomous republics under the direction of their
elected councils, whilst their bishops aspired to maintain them under
their jurisdictional control, as part of their fiefs. This unrest was
not new, as Compostela had known bloody conflicts of the bourgeois and
the bishops since the first years of the 12th century, in times of
Gelmirez, when the bishop himself was chased inside the city. In these
conflicts, Don Felipe and the local nobility usually supported the
councils' pretensions in opposition to the mighty and rich bishops,
although most of the time the military and economic relevance of the
archbishop of Santiago proved determinant in the maintenance of the
*status quo*.

The conflict in the City of Compostela reached its zenith in September
1320, when after forty years of autonomy and two years of war, the new
archbishop, the French Bérenger de Landore, assassinated the nobleman
Alonso Suárez de Deza together with the members of the City Council in
his castle of *A Rocha Forte* near Santiago, where he had attracted them
for talks. While Berenger's forcefulness temporarily pacified the city,
he still had to fight for another year just to take the rest of the
fiefdom. However, twenty-five years later, the City Council of
Compostela obtained the long-sought *reguengo* status, granted by King
Alfonso XI. Similar conflicts are also known in other Galician cities.

In 1348, the Black Death, locally known as *A Mortaldade*, reached the
ports of Galicia, decimating the population, and causing a severe and
lasting economic crisis.

### Civil War of the Castilian Crown (1366–1369)

In 1360 the kingdom of Galicia was again at the centre of a succession
crisis, this time of European dimension. The throne of Castile was
disputed between King King Peter I and his half-brother, Henry II of
Castile|Henry Count of Trastámara, within the broader context of the
Hundred Years' War. This fratricidal conflict lasted between 1354 and
1369, having its origin in the policies of Peter I, who tried to expand
his royal power while leaning on the councils of cities and
municipalities; this would come at the expense of the high nobility,
including Castilian families such as Pimentel, Ponce de León, Mendoza,
Fernández de Córdoba, and Alvarez de Toledo; and Galician ones as
Castro. As a result, in 1354 a coalition of nobles rose in defence of a
pactual monarchy, although this coalition was soon discontinued.

Henry, illegitimate son of Alfonso XI of Castile and half-brother of
Peter, took advantage of the dissatisfaction among the noblemen to
launch a war against Peter, with the support of Peter IV of Aragon, with
whom Peter was already at war, and along companies of mercenaries such
as that commanded by Bertrand du Guesclin. Meanwhile, Peter drew his
support from the municipalities and part of the nobility, most notably
the Galician Castro family headed by Fernando Rodrigues de Castro,
*Pertegueiro Maior* of Santiago and *Adelantado Mayor* of Galicia, who
after defecting Henry in 1355 was playing the same role as the Traba
family two hundred years before. Other notable supporters were Sueiro
Eans Parada, Men Rodrigues de Seabra, and the Moscoso family.

In 1366 Pedro was forced to flee into Andalusia, while Fernando de
Castro routed to Galicia. After a dangerous journey through Portugal,
King Pedro made it to Galicia, where an assembly of supporters decided
to send him into Gascony, looking for English support, whilst at the
same time inner enemies as the archbishop of Compostela were
assassinated or prosecuted. This same year, with Pedro abroad, a
temporal truce permitted Henry to present himself in Galicia, where he
obtained the support of some important aristocrats, most notably Fernan
Peres de Andrade,

In 1367, and counting with the additional support of the archers of the
English prince Edward of Woodstock, Peter gained a victory at the battle
of Najera, which allowed himself to took the war into Andalucia.
However, the entry of England's enemy Charles V of France on Henry's
side had a destabilising effect. In 1369 the new archbishop of Santiago,
the loyalist Rodrigo de Moscoso, ordered his knights to march urgently
into Andalusia on the support of the King and of Fernando de Castro, but
the call was ignored. The capture of Peter during the Battle of Montiel
and his subsequent murder left Henry II in control of the Crown of
Castile.

### Ferdinand I of Portugal king in Galicia

The triumph of the high nobility in Castile, as represented by the death
of Peter I and crowning of their candidate, Henry II, was resisted by
the majority of Galician nobles, who anyway had been forgiven by the new
King. Under the leading of Fernando de Castro the Galician loyalist
party, together with the Galician cities, invited Ferdinand I of
Portugal to be their king, assuring him that the Galician nobles and
citizens would "raise their voices for him ... and they hand him the
cities and recognize as lord and will honor him".

In his triumphant entrance Ferdinand was accompanied by many
aristocratic Galician supporters, including the same Fernando de Castro,
Count of Trastamara, Alvar Peres de Castro, the lord of Salvaterra de
Miño|Salvaterra, and Nuno Freire de Andrade, Master of the Portuguese
Order of Christ, being acclaimed in the cities and towns: Tui,
Redondela, Ribadavia, Ourense, Lugo, Padrón, Compostela, and finally A
Coruña, which was given to the king by its keeper, Joan Fernandes de
Andeiro.

During his brief government in Galicia, Ferdinand I set about the
restoration of the Galician strongholds, including Tui and Baiona, and
instituted trade liberalization between Galicia and Portugal, supplying
grain and wine by sea to the war-weakened Galician populace. He also
made provisions for the issuance of gold and silver coinage at Tui and A
Coruña to be recognized as valid throughout Galicia and Portugal.

Despite these measures, the presence of the Portuguese monarch was
short-lived. Henry II of Castile, with the support of the mercenaries of
Du Guesclin, launched an offensive that forced Ferdinand I into
Portugal. Later, in 1371, with the Portuguese troops defending
themselves of Henry's mercenaries, Fernando de Castro and the Galician
nobles were defeated in the battle of *Porto de Bois*, near Lugo, by
Henry's men: Pedro Manrique, governor of Castile, and Pedro Rois
Sarmento. Fernando de Castro fled to Portugal, being later banished to
Gascony under the terms of the *Treaty of Santarém* which forced
Portugal to expel many of the Galician supporters of Fernando I, dying
there in 1377.

In 1372, after Henry had defeated Men Rodrigues de Seabra, Castilian
rule was re-established over most of Galicia, although A Coruña resisted
till 1373 being regularly supplied by Portuguese ships.

### John of Gaunt

The expulsion of Ferdinand I of Portugal and the abandonment of his
claim to Galicia was followed a year later by the capture of Tui by
Diego Sarmento on behalf of Henry II. However, the town of Coruña
remained faithful to Portugal until 1373, whilst João Fernandes de
Andeiro, exiled in England, entered negotiations for further support for
the loyalist Galician party, at the same time laying the foundation of
the secular alliance between England and Portugal. On July 10, 1372 a
treaty was signed by which Constance, daughter of Peter I, claimed the
legitimate right to succeed her father. Her husband, John of Gaunt, Duke
of Lancaster and son of King Edward III of England, then claimed the
Castilian Crown on her behalf.

John's first attempt to make good on this claim failed when his troops
were diverted to Poitou to participate in the clashes against France as
part of the Hundred Years' War. In July 25, 1386, with the support of a
papal bull of Urban IV confirming his right to the Crown of Castile, he
landed in Coruña with some 1500 archers, 1500 lancers and some 4000
other supporters, without fighting or attacking the city. Following
negotiations it was agreed that the city would open its gates once the
Duke was received in Santiago de Compostela; being admitted there,
John's troops, assisted by Galician exiles took control of Pontevedra,
Vigo, Baiona and Betanzos without a fight, whilst John himself proceed
to Ourense, where he found resistance on behalf of Breton troops at the
service of John I of Castile. Meanwhile the port of Ferrol was taken by
John's ally the Portuguese king John I of Portugal, and the town of
Ribadavia—where the local Jews, most of them of Leonese extraction,
apparently presented a fierce defence—was assaulted after a siege by the
troops commanded by Thomas Percy. At the end of these military actions,
and specifically with the taking of Ferrol, the Duke controlled the
whole Kingdom of Galicia, as reported in the chronicles of Jean
Froissart, stating «avoient mis en leur obeissance tout le roiaulme de
Gallice».

This initial success came to an end when plague decimated the English
army in Galicia during 1386 and 1387. Later, in 1387, together with the
Portuguese, he launched an unsuccessfully assault into the dry
landscapes of Castile; finally John was forced to negotiate with John I
of Castile. In their 1388 peace treaty, the Duke of Lancaster and
Constance of Castile renounced their claim to Castile in exchange for
monetary compensation, and a marriage alliance between their daughter
and the son and heir of Henry II, the future Henry III of Castile. The
withdrawal of the English armies brought an end to the attempts of the
Galician nobility and the town councils to bring about secession of
Galicia from the Crown of Castile.

### The 15th century

After the defeat of the loyalist party, with their leaders consequently
exiled in Portugal or dead abroad, king Henry II and John I introduced a
series of foreign noble houses in Galicia as tenants of important fiefs.
The important County of Trastámara, ancient dominions of the Traba and
Castro houses, was given first to Pedro Eníquez de Castro, nephew of
King Henry II; later, in 1440 it was divided in the two counties of
Trastamara and Lemos, and given to the Osorio house of the frontier
lands of Bierzo. In the South some important concession was given to the
Sarmento family, which on time would possess the job of *Adelantado
Mayor* of the Kingdom of Galicia as a family legacy; and to the Pimentel
of Benavente. Some of these families, most notably the Osorio as Counts
of Lemos, would become during the 16th and 17th centuries the most
influential defenders of any Galician cause. But during the 15th
century, in the absence of a solid leadership as those exercised in the
past by the archbishop of Santiago or by the Counts of Trastámara, the
Kingdom of Galicia was reduced to a set of semi-independent and rival
fiefdoms, militarily important, but with little political influence
abroad.

The 15th century was characterized by the rapacity of these and other
local noble houses (among others, the Moscoso in western Galicia, the
Andrade in the North, the Soutomaior in the South and West, the Ulloa in
central Galicia) each one directed by the heir of the lineage, not
unusually a woman. The houses, and their minor knights and squires,
tried to acquire every type of economic and jurisdictional title
(usually as *encomendeiros*, that is, protectors) over towns and cities,
monasteries, bishoprics, and even over royal properties, towns and
territories. Castles and mottes were used all along Galicia to hold and
keep the noblemen's armies, and as outposts for raiding enemies and
victims. The noblemen frequently fought each other for the possession of
these strongholds.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  We obey that letters (…) but regarding the fulfillment of what we are asked, we say that what these letters demand of us is very burdensome, and it would be impossible for us to accomplish it (…) There were not called the deputies of this Kingdom of Galicia, most notably those of the cities (…) For in this Kingdom there is an archbishopric, four bishoprics, and other towns and places of our lord the Prince, and of three Counties, and of many other great knights; and it would be very accomplishing and very necessary for the King and for this Kingdom to invoke its deputies.\
   Letter of the City Council of Ourense to the King, 1454.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Similar conflict were frequent between city councils and the Church,
even occasioning the dead of the bishop of Lugo in 1403, and the bishop
of Ourense in 1419. All these wars, together with the thievery exert by
bandits, created a climate of violence, war, and insecurity all along
Galicia. These practices were possible and successful partly because of
the remoteness of the King: during the whole 15th century no monarch
ever come to visit Galicia, except for the Catholic Monarchs in 1486.
This absence on one hand transformed the King in a remote ideal of
Justice, whilst in the other affirmed the sensation of impunity and
defencelessness among the inhabitants of the Kingdom.

The remoteness of the monarch is also notorious in the Kingdom of
Galicia having lost his vote in the *Cortes* (Parliament) sometime
during the late 14th or early 15th centuries. In 1423, in the absence of
other Galician cities, the city of Zamora (located in León, but
historically linked to Galicia) asked to be treated accordingly with its
claimed condition of capital of the Kingdom of Galicia, honour which was
recognised to the city, with their deputies sitting next to the monarch
at his right. Till 1640 Zamora represented the Kingdom of Galicia in the
*Cortes*, usually against the will and the advice of the Galician
cities.

Under this difficult circumstances, with constant wars, conflicts and
unpunished crimes, the cities of Galicia, which progressively acquired a
leading role during this century, entered in a period of fiscal
untowardness in between 1430 and 1460; they refused to pay certain taxes
to the King (John II and Henry IV) because of the many and onerous
services the Kingdom rendered to the King; because of the absence of
justice which had led to the economic destruction of the Kingdom: *Due
to the decline of thy justice and thou not having remedied this (…) thou
have a great burden in thy conscience*; and because of the absence of
Galician deputies in the Parliament to defend the interests of the
Kingdom

### Irmandinos Wars

During the entire 15th century, a time of social and economical crisis
all along Europe, the violence grew in a series of wars and insurrection
that perturbed all of the Kingdom of Galicia; these insurrections were
replies to the violence exerted by the bishops and the noblemen on the
churchmen, artisans and peasants. The insurgents usually were organized
in *irmandades* (meaning 'brotherhoods'), groups of men who in
exceptional circumstances, and allegedly with the King's approval, armed
themselves to act as a policemen in defence of peace and justice.

A brotherhood was established in Compostela in 1418, taking advantage of
the temporal absence of the archbishop, and violently taking hold of the
city in 1422, overruling the City Council. Another one, called
*Fusquenlla* or 'The Mad Brotherhood', rose up in the north of the
kingdom against the House of Andrade. The armies of the brotherhood,
directed by the lesser nobleman Roi Xordo, were finally defeated by the
Andrade's armies by the gates of Compostela in 1431. Later, in 1453, the
troops of the bishop of Ourense and that of the Council of the city
fought fiercely for the possession of the local castles, even using
*tronos* (cannons, literally 'thunders'), and forcing the bishop into
the exile. In 1458 a brotherhood was established bringing together some
important noblemen (the House of Moscoso and Sueiro Gomes de Soutomaior
among others) and the cities and towns of Compostela, Noia, and Muros, A
Coruña|Muros, against the archbishop of Santiago, who was first caught
as a prisoner, being kept and paraded in a cage for two years, later
being banished for ten years after their supporters had paid an onerous
rescue. Similar revolts were producing all along the kingdom, in
Betanzos, Viveiro, Lugo and Allariz. All of these Galician brotherhoods
acted autonomously, sometimes even against King's will and direct
orders.

In 1465 the Crown of Castile was again in crisis, with King Henry IV
under siege by Castilian noblemen who were supporting an aristocratic
candidate to the throne. Henry reacted sending letters all around the
realm, calling for the establishment of brotherhoods to defend the
*status quo*. From 1465 to 1467 local brotherhoods were organized all
along Galicia, gaining the adhesion of churchmen, artisans, peasants,
and some noblemen.

In the spring of 1467 a General Council of the Kingdom of Galicia
(*Junta General do Reyno de Galizia*) was held in Melide, A
Coruña|Melide. After an angry debate it was decided that noblemen should
deliver all of their strongholds and castles to the officials of the
*Irmandade*, resulting in many assistant noblemen fleeing to exile,
while others resisted the armies of the *Irmandiños* ('little
brothers'), only to be slowly beaten back into Castile and Portugal; as
described by a contemporary, 'the sparrows pursued the falcons'. For the
rest of the year the armies of the Brotherhood marched all over Galicia,
fighting the lords and demolishing tens of strongholds.

From 1467 to 1469 the Kingdom of Galicia was governed by the
*Irmandade*, directed by the city dwellers, whilst its armies—composed
mostly of armed peasants—were commanded by sympathizing noblemen, as the
veteran soldiers they were. General Councils of the Kingdom were later
held in Betanzos and Santiago de Compostela in 1467, in Lugo in 1468,
and in Ourense in 1469. But in autumn of 1469 the exiled noblemen,
joining forces, marched into Galicia: Pedro Alvares de Soutomaior
entered from Portugal with gunmen and mercenaries; the archbishop
Fonseca of Compostela from Zamora; and the Count of Lemos from
Ponferrada. Meanwhile, other noblemen who had resisted inside the
Kingdom also pushed forward. In 1469 and 1470 the *Irmandiño* armies
were defeated all along the Country, except in some well defended cities
such as A Coruña.

After the defeat of the Brotherhood, the noblemen, regaining their
states and granting themselves sonorous titles ordered the
reconstructions of a number of strongholds, usually using the rebels as
labour force. This same year of 1470 the noblemen assigned a pact of
mutual help, which supposed the beginning of a long war against the
archbishop of Santiago, were Pedro Alvarez de Soutomaior, called Pedro
*Madruga*, turned as the leader of the nobility.

The situation of the Kingdom of Galicia in 1473 is described by a
noblemen in his last will:

### Catholic Monarchs

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  “The archbishop [Alfonso II de Fonseca] did a great service for the King when against the will of that whole Kingdom [of Galicia], being everyone in resistance, the archbishop received the Hermandad in Santiago; and in one day he made the *Hermandad* to be received and proclaimed from the Minho till the Sea, which was as investing the King and Queen as lords of that Kingdom”\
   *Annales de Aragón* by Jerónimo Zurita, Book XIX.46

  “It was then when the taming of Galicia began, because not just the local lords and knights, but all the people of that nation were the ones against the others very bold and warlike”\
   *Annales de Aragon*, XIX.69.
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

At the death of Henry IV in 1474 civil war broke between his daughter
Joanna and his half-sister Isabella. Isabella had married her cousin
Fernando II of Aragon, being supported by Aragonese and Catalans, while
Joanna married the king of Portugal Afonso V, so obtaining this
country's support. In Galicia archbishop Fonseca sided with Isabella,
while Pedro Madruga|Pedro Álvarez de Soutomaior, who had large interests
in Portugal and in southern Galicia, took a stand for Joanna, being
rewarded by the king of Portugal with the title of Count of Caminha.
Notwithstanding, most noblemen behaved cautiously, awaiting to join the
winner's side.

In October 1476 Fonseca launched against the well-defended city of
Pontevedra, held by Pedro *Madruga*, an army composed of 200 lancers and
5000 infantrymen, with no effect, while a Basque navy commanded by
Ladrón de Guevara took Baiona and assaulted Viveiro; but the tenacity of
Pedro resulted in a draw. In 1479, the armies of Fonseca moved south
again, against Pedro Madruga, and after a series of battles forced the
Count of Caminha into Portugal, although Tui, Salvaterra de Miño and
other towns and strongholds were still held by his people and their
Portuguese allies. In 1480, a peace treaty recognised Isabella and
Fernando, the Catholic Monarchs, as queen and king. By the peace treaty
with Portugal and Juana, all the enemies of Isabel, and namely Pedro
*Madruga*, were granted pardon.

This same year, and against the advise of Galician nobility, the
Catholic monarchs sent to Galicia a Castilian police and military corps,
the *Santa Hermandad*, soon criticised not only as an institution
composed mostly by foreigners, but also as a heavy burden to the local
economy, raising and consuming more than 6 million maravedi per year—the
budget of Columbus' first journey to America was of just 2 million
maravedi—whilst also becoming growingly unpopular due to its
arbitrariness and rudeness with the local inhabitants.

This corps, reinforced with mercenary troops and under the pretension of
pacifying the country and getting rid of adventurers and thieves, was
also used as field army at the service of the policies of the monarchs.
As personal representatives, the Catholic Monarchs also sent a new
plenipotentiary Governor of the Kingdom of Galicia—an office first
established in 1475—and a *Justiçia Mayor* (Attorney general), together
with a series of other officials and collection agents. They also
appointed royal aldermen in some of the cities and towns.

From 1480 to 1485, the *Santa Hermandad* and the new official, endorsed
with local supporters, worked jointly harassing economically and
militarily the noblemen, who were largely against the new order impulsed
by the Monarchs. But the resistance was ended with the dead of their
leader, the Count of Lemos, together with the wars fought and gained
against Marshal Pardo de Cela and Count Pedro *Madruga*; the first one
was beheaded in Mondoñedo in 1483, whilst Pedro was deposed in 1485 by
his own son, Álvaro, a long shot to save the lineage of Soutomaior.

The establishment in 1500 of the *Real Audiencia del Reino de Galicia*
(a permanent royal tribunal), and later the forced reformation and
submission of the Galician monasteries to the Castilian ones,
represented the integration *de facto* of the Kingdom of Galicia in the
Crown of Castile.

Modern age
----------

### The *Junta* or General Assembly of the Kingdom

The *Junta*, *Junta General*, *Juntas*, or *Cortes* of the Kingdom of
Galicia was the representative assembly of the Kingdom from the 15th
century, when it originated as a general assembly of all the powers of
Galicia aimed at the constitution of *hermandades* (brotherhood), and
until 1834, when the Kingdom and its General Assembly were officially
disbanded by a Royal decree.

Initially the *Juntas Generales* was an assembly where representatives
of the three states of the Kingdom (noblemen, churchmen, and the
commoners) met, but it soon followed the evolution prompted by the King
in other representative institutions, such as the Cortes of Castile,
becoming the assembly monopolized by the bourgeoisie and lesser nobility
(*fidalgos*), who controlled most of the local councils of the cities
and towns of the Kingdom, and at the expenses of Church and nobility.
From 1599 the composition of the assembly became fixed and reduced to
just seven deputies, each one representing one of the Kingdom provinces,
and appointed by the local council of the province's capital —Santiago
de Compostela, A Coruña, Betanzos, Lugo, Mondoñedo, Ourense, and Tui—
from among its members. Other towns, namely Viveiro and Pontevedra,
tried during the 17th and 18th century to regain a direct representative
in the assembly, to no effect.

The *Junta* have no direct intervention in law making, and were
permitted little control on the Royal administration, but it could
nevertheless rise armies, ships and taxes, conceding or denying the
King's petitions on behalf of the local powers of the Kingdom, and it
could also petition the King directly, being recognized as the voice and
representative of the Kingdom and the depositary of its will, traditions
and rights (*foros*). Notwithstanding, the King never consented on the
petition of the assembly to meet at will, and from 1637 he decreed that
the meetings of the assembly can only take place when in presence of one
representative of the monarch, with voice, usually the Governor-Captain
General of the Kingdom, so trying to maintain a tighter grip on the
institution and its agreements.

As a reaction of the abdication of king Ferdinand VII in favour of
Napoleon, the *Junta* declared itself sovereign and supreme authority of
the Kingdom in June 18, 1808, during the Peninsular war, becoming so the
legitimate and *de facto* government of the Kingdom until Galicia was
conquered by the Napoleonic troops in 1809. At the effect of having a
broader base and representativeness, it briefly admitted among its
members churchmen (the bishop of Ourense) and titled noblemen.

### Policies of Philip II (1556–1598)

In 1556, Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor abdicated the throne and divided
his realm between his brother Ferdinand I of Habsburg, and his son
Philip II. In practice this resulted in the disappearance of the
European empire of the Habsburgs and the idea of a universal Catholic
monarchy. Ferdinand was declared Holy Roman Emperor and king of Hungary
and Bohemia, while Philip inherited the Netherlands, Naples and Sicily,
the Crown of Aragon and Castile, including the Kingdom of Galicia.

The 42-year reign of Philip II was noted from the beginning by
war—against the Netherlands, France, England, Portugal and the Ottoman
Empire—motivated by the personal ambition of the monarch, who tried not
only to avoid the loss of his domains, but to expand it. He created a
battlefield across the Atlantic and northern Europe that had not only
disastrous consequences for the Galician economy, but also for the
society and people of the Kingdom of Galicia.

With his private crusade against the Lutherans, the Catholic monarchy
prevented the participation of the Kingdom of Galicia in the three most
important revolutionary processes of the age, the Reformation, the
opening up of the New World, and the Scientific revolution. In 1562,
Philip II deployed the Holy Office, via the Spanish Inquisition, in the
Kingdom of Galicia, after the failure of Charles V's attempts to do so
due to the opposition of the Galician clergy.

The Inquisition was an instrument of cultural and religious repression
without precedent, which began operating in Portugal from 1575, led by
the Castilian Inquisitor Quijano del Mercado. The Inquisition's stated
aim was to prevent the "contamination" of the Kingdom of Galicia by the
reformist ideas of the Lutherans, which arrived in Galicia via English,
Dutch and French traders. This situation also had serious commercial
consequences, because one of the tasks of the Inquisition was to review
the merchant ships, requiring them to receive visitation rights and
condemning to be burned at the stake any sailors likely to be . The
Inquisition even went as far as proposing the closure of all Galician
seaports to avoid religious assimilation. Such measures eventually
exceeded the patience of the inhabitants of cities like A Coruña, where
in 1589 the city requested the end of inquisitorial activity at the
seaport due to the serious reduction of maritime traffic in the city in
this period.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  "Rodrigo Montero, cleric, priest and rector of the Fort of San Felipe ... declared that ... the armies of the King our Lord (Philip II), have stayed here in winter and summer in the seaport town of Ferrol ... have done great harms to the residents of the town of Ferrol ... as they (the Spanish troops) took the houses where Ferrol people lived and the troops forced them to leave it and look for others ... troops have removed and cut the vines and breaking civilian's walls ... also razed and felled the forests and wood in people's forests ... took by force the boats to the inhabitants of the said town of Ferrol and the troops forced them to recruit and work for them without payment ... these services didn't allow the Ferrol's men go fishing and feed their wives and children and ... the troops also ate and destroyed the fruits of their trees and cabbages, vegetables and turnips and more lelgumbres of their orchards ... stole them also wood tabals from the civilians houses got repairing their vessels and the benefit of the said vessels ... |- (Rodrigo Montero, September 2, 1603)
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Philip II's reign saw the continuation of the expulsion of the Jews from
May 30, 1492, linguistic persecution (from 1566 the adoption of
Castilian was enforced, and the use of Arabic was punished by the
Crown), and religious persecutions effectively constituted ethnic
cleansing. For example, in Alpujarra in the Kingdom of Granada in 1568,
which was at the time led by self-proclaimed Granadian king Muhammad ibn
Umayya, was ordered the forced dispersal of 80,000 Granadian Muslims
throughout the realm, and the introduction of Christians in their place.
Thousands of Galician families were sent to Granada for that purpose
between the years 1572–77, with many of them dying in the process.

In the field of war, the militarization motivated by the war against the
Netherlands, which was largely a strategic battle used to garner support
for the crown, contrasted with the lack of defence in Galicia resulting
from the Catholic Monarchs removing the Galician strongholds to prevent
a revolt of the kingdom. Thus, in 1580 the Board of the Kingdom of
Galicia requested troops for Philip II to defend the coast, just months
after a strong military recruitment had taken place. However these
troops were not used to protect the kingdom, but instead to attack
Portugal in to try to put Philip on the Portuguese throne.

Despite claims to the contrary, the military campaign against Portugal
was not carried out by professional soldiers billeted at A Coruña,
Ferrol, or Baiona, and was not paid by the crown, but was rather
conducted by ill-equipped peasant troops, and paid for by Galician
nobles such as Pedro Fernandes de Castro II, the Count of Monterrei,
Gaspar de Zúñiga e Azevedo, and others. The war against England
(1585–1604), motivated by the traditional English support of Portugal
and Holland, also had disastrous consequences for the Kingdom of
Galicia. This was due to both the disruption of trade relations with
northern Europe, which since the Middle Ages had provided enormous
wealth to the kingdom, and also by the onset of constant attacks by
England in order to end the maritime expeditions sent by Philip II as
the Spanish Armada in 1588.

The outcome of these royal policies was the complete ruin of Galician
villages such as Ferrol, where the civilians were ruined due to the
expulsion from their homes by Philip's soldiers, who seized all their
crops and property, and drove the fishermen into forced labor. Towns
like A Coruña also suffered constant attacks by the English fleet, such
as by Francis Drake in 1589, with the cities being protected by
civilians troops and heroic people as Maria Pita.

### The last Habsburgs (1598–1700)

The death of Philip II in 1598 didn't change the socio-political future
of Galicia, but the worsening insecurity and poverty in the kingdom.
Although the reign of Philip III of Spain (1598–1621) was marked by a
more conciliatory foreign policy and peaceful than that of his father,
however, in general the 17th century (reigns of Philip IV and Charles
II) was witnessed of dramatical wars between the Habsburg´s territories
against Holland, England, France and especially Portugal, which had a
remarkable social and economic impact in Galicia.

Thus, while the conflicts against the Ottomans had a great impact in the
kingdom with the devastating attack in the Rias Baixas in 1617, the
unpopular war against Portugal (1640–1668) and the war waged by the
Habsburg monarchs against the Netherlands for decades, accounted a
constant bleeding of Galician peasants, who were sent to the war front
from the Atlantic seaports. Fray Felipe de la Gandara, official
chronicler of the kingdom of Galicia complained that during 25 years
(between the years 1624 and 1659), "the kingdom of Galicia has served
for now during the glorious reign of His Majesty (Philip IV) until the
year 1659 with more than 68,000 men and 18,001,000 ducats".

The war effects also made the point in the economy, the kingdom
continued suffering a trade serious paralysis with all its Atlantic
traditional customers; England, France, Flanders, and even particularly
serious with its main customer, Portugal, whose border had been closed
for over three decades due to war with what the Habsburgs sought to
avoid the independence of the Portuguese kingdom.

The provisions of the Spanish monarchs against trading timber in the
kingdom, also contributed to deepen the crisis. With the imposition a
new (and controversial) administrative figure; the *juez de plantíos y
dehesas* ("judge of forests and plantings") the Castilian Council
reclaimed the economical rights in the Galician forest holdings for the
construction warships dedicated to the war. While the Galicia
inhabitants came to be arrested for the simple collection of firewood to
heat their houses as he denounced the Galicia Council (*Junta del Reyno
de Galicia*).

### Restoration of voting at the Council of Castile (1623)

From the reign of King John II of Castile, the kingdom of Galicia was no
longer involved in the Crown Council, and from about 1476 Zamora in León
acted on behalf of Galicia in the assembly of the Crown of Castile.
However, from 1518 the Galician cities and towns began to demand to
regain their legitimate voting in the Council of Castile, and rejected
the Zamoran leaders speaking for them.

The recovery of their voting rights at the Council of Castile was a goal
shared by the Galician aristocracy and the kingdom's oligarchs. In 1520
the Archbishop of Santiago, Afonso III da Fonseca, and the Counts of
Benavente and Andrade complained about it during the celebration of the
Castilian Council in the Galician capital, Compostela, but to no avail.
The involvement of Galician elites achieved an assembly between nobles
and prelates of the kingdom in the town of Melide, A Coruña|Melide in
central Galicia on December 4, 1520. This was headed by Afonso III da
Fonseca, and they sent a new demand to the emperor on the subject of the
vote, however Charles V again refused to give Galicia an independent
voice.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Quando eu non tibera a obrigaçon que o mundo save pola nobreça que en Vmd coñeço o fijera A esos meus señores seus fillos de Vmd e primos meus ueyjo infinitas ueçes as mans e deus os faga en to do seus fillos de Vmd e de miña señora Dona Costança. A quens garde noso señor como eu seu criado desejo. Çamora, oje, sabado. Seu sobriño de Vmd. Don Juan de Lanços y de Andrade*
  Year 1598. Sent to Diego Sarmiento de Acuña, this letter is one of the few witnesses in Galician language during the 17th century.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A year after the emperor's refusal, the Galician city council took a new
initiative, and in 1557 the kingdom representation offered 20,000 ducats
to demand its vote in the Castilian Council. This aspiration was put to
successive meetings, until in 1599 the kingdom's audience accepted the
Galician cities' demands, and agreed to negotiate exclusively that
subject. Two delegations were chosen to go to Madrid, but the new
economic offer was rejected.

However, as of 1621, there arose circumstances that led to the success
of the Galician aspirations. The monarchy needed the political and
financial cooperation of their kingdoms in order to sustain their war
efforts, following the end of twelve years of truce. The oligarchy and
the Galician city councils were able to seize that occasion, and despite
the resistance of Zamora, and the eagerness of other cities with
exclusionary voting at the Courts, the Crown sacrificed political
expediency for the sake of military necessity, and in 1623 the kingdom
of Galicia regained the vote, dependant upon paying 100,000 ducats to
build a navy to defend its own coastline. The influence of Diego
Sarmiento de Acuña, Count Gondomar, was crucial to the success of this
action, and Philip IV signed the resolution on October 13, 1623.

### The establishment of the Bourbons (18th century)

In 1700, Charles II of Habsburg died without heir, what caused a war
broke out between those who supported the French Philip V of Bourbon as
the successor (mainly the crown of Castile and France) and those who
supported the Austrian Archduke Charles VI of Habsburg (the Crown of
Aragon, England and Holland among others). In fact the struggle between
these two suitors was also basically a struggle between two political
conceptions: in one hand the absolutist centralism French -represented
by Philip V and the Bourbon monarchy- and in other hand the of
federalism of Charles VI of Habsburg. In this long war (1701–1714)
between the crown of Castile and the Crown of Aragon, the kingdom of
Galicia could not avail itself of an own policy due to be controlled
strongly since 1486 by Castile, so that troops and positions in Galicia
had to serve to the suitor supported by the Castilian Crown; Philip V of
Bourbon, who in 1714 that eventually won this war.

From the political point of view, the result of this war was the
establishment of a monarchy that settled in Castile, from where it
developed a uniformizing policy, which had its maximum expression in the
"Nueva Planta Decrees" (1707–1716) which were designed to punish the
Crown of Aragon through eliminating their political bodies and imposing
a "Audiencia" such as took place 200 years before in the kingdom of
Galicia. With the suppression of the old crowns -Castile and Aragon- in
1715, was created the "Crown of Spain" that was governed solely by
Castilian government, notably by the Council of Castile. Besides,
Bourbons established according to the French model, a "provincial
Intendance" on their territories, taking the kingdom of Galicia an
Intendance, and being under the command of a General Captain.

Cultural and linguistic polities were strongly standarizing, according
to the centralist conception of the Bourbons, which is expressed in
explicit and stringent laws to end the linguistic diversity in the
kingdoms (over Bourbons control) that had a native language different
from Castilian:

*Finally, I command that the teaching of the first letters, Latin and
rhetoric will only in Castilian language, taking care this compliance
the Audiencias and the respective Courts. May 23, 1768*. Charles III of
Bourbon.

### The Enlightenment (1746–88)

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Not a few times I thought which was the reason why in Galicia has introduced the use or abuse of writing in Castilian, ... who have introduced it? ... Not the Galicians, but the Foreigners (Castilians) who in the early 16th century flooded the Kingdom of Galicia, not to cultivate their lands, but to eat the best flesh and blood, and to receive the best jobs, such as ecclesiastical as civil, they have been, not knowing the Galician language, nor by word or in writing, have introduced the monstrosity of writing in Castilian, for a people that speaks just the pure Galician.
  Year 1762. "Obra de los 660 Pliegos". Martín Sarmiento.
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

During the 18th century, like in other European kingdoms, arose a
movement representing a new interest in empirical ideas, in philosophy,
political economy, and sciences such as physics, chemistry, and
biology—what today is named the Age of Enlightenment. In this context
began a process of construction and a recovery of consciousness of the
historical personality, the cultural and economic diversity of the
Kingdom of Galicia due to important Galician Enlightenment writers who
knew Galicia as a differentiated society, and as a kingdom with special
needs.

In the vast task of modernizing the kingdom to use to best advantage
their human and natural resources, the Galician societies and academies
played a prominent role, such as the *Academy of Agriculture of the
Kingdom of Galicia* (inaugurated on January 20, 1765), *The Economic
Society of Friends of the Kingdom of Galicia* (February 15, 1784), and
the *Societies of Friends of the Country to Santiago de Compostela*
(1784) and *Lugo* (1785), as well as ambitious proposals such as the
*Royal Fishermen´s Pawnshop of the Kingdom of Galicia* (1775).

The Enlightenment writers were the first to denounce the difficulties of
the kingdom, most of them arising from the negative politics that the
kingdom suffered by the Catholic Monarchs and the Habsburgs´ polities.
They began reporting on the state of roads, the unnecessary imports, the
mass emigration, the linguistic acculturation polities, and the economic
marginalization of the kingdom. Due to their demands, they achieved,
among others successes, the constitution of a *Maritime and Land
Consulate* in A Coruña, allowing to the Galicia to trade with the
American colonies.

In the enormous contribution to language and culture of the kingdom, two
ecclesiastics stand out, Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro and Martín
Sarmiento. Montenegro was the first to denounce the misery of the
Galician peasants, proposing changes in the administration of the
kingdom. Sarmiento, with extensive knowledge of botany and natural
medicines, devoted himself to philology; he wrote the *Catalogue of
voices and phrases of the Galician language* (1745–1755), and was a
great defender of the Galician language, defending it against those who
tried discredit it. Economic themes were also highlighted by other
Galician aristocrats, such as Joseph Cornide Saavedra, Pedro Antonio
Sánchez, and Lucas Labrada, as well as ecclesiastics like Francisco de
Castro, and merchants like Antonio Raimundo Ibáñez. They were all
authors of many works of vital importance in economic development, such
*Report on sardine fishing off the coast of Galicia* (1774), and the
*Economic description of the Kingdom of Galicia* (1804).

### 19th century

The Kingdom of Galicia and the Junta continued to formally exist until
the State Liberal Reform of 1833, at the time of the provincial division
under the regency of Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies|María Cristina.
Galicia regained its territorial unity for twenty-four days by the
constitution of the *Junta de Gobierno de Galicia* following a liberal
armed uprising in 1846, the Mártires de Carral, but never regained the
status of a kingdom.

Symbols of the kingdom
----------------------

### The purple lion

The custom of painting symbols such as the heraldic shields of war was
forged in the battlefields of Europe after the middle decades of the
12th century, due to a confluence of circumstances of different natures.
One was the need to differentiate between allies and adversaries on the
battlefield, partly due to facial protection in medieval helmets
obscuring the combatant's faces, but also due to the high ornamental
value of decorated shields with bright, crisp, and alternate shapes in
the context of the chivalrous society.

The first heraldic signs were used by kings as a personal mark to
identify himself. Shortly after they began to be shared by the upper
social levels close to the royalty, and finally were used to represent
the territory in which they exercised their jurisdiction, the kingdom.

One of the first kings in Europe who made use of a heraldic emblem was
the Leonese king, Alfonso VII of León|Alphonse VII. At the beginning of
the 12th century he began timidly using a purple lion in accordance with
its ancient symbolism, as *Leo Fortis*, the "strong lion", symbolized
power and primacy of the monarch, but would also have represented a
punning reference to the name of his kingdom, León. The emblem was
developed with his son Ferdinand II of León|Ferdinand II, and was
finally established by Alfonso IX of León|Alphonse IX.

### The Chalice, symbol of the kingdom

Parallel to the process of development and consolidation of European
royal emblems from the late 13th century, collections of them, the
*Armorials*, displayed lists of kingdoms and their royal symbols. In the
case of Galicia, antiquity and the prominence which the Kingdom had had
during centuries saw it inclusion in the early European armorials,
however the absence of an exclusive symbol for Galician kings, who were
also kings of León since the 12th century, forced to the medieval
heraldists to use Canting arms, which was a symbol derived from the
phonetics of the name.

An English armorial named *Segar's Roll*, produced in 1282, was the
first Armorial which assigned the chalice as the Coat of Arms for the
King and Kingdom of Galicia (*Roy de Galice*), probably coming directly
from the Anglo-Norman word for Galicia, *Galyce*, which was very close
to the word *Calice* (chalice). Following that time, different European
armorials began to use the chalice as the emblem of the Kingdom of
Galicia. In the mid-15th century, this symbol came to Galicia, where it
was easily and readily accepted, as the Holy Grail was already a symbol
widely spread over Europe and already present in Galician history and
deepest beliefs.

Thereafter, the purple lion of the former Galician-Leonese monarchy lost
its representative character in favor of the better known canting arms,
being then adopted exclusively by the Kingdom of León, whilst in Galicia
the chalice would develop into the modern coat-of-arms of Galicia.

<File:Reino> de Galicia - Kingdom of Galicia - Segars Roll.jpg|Arms of
the Kings of Galicia, Segar's Roll, 13th century <File:Reino> de
Galicia-kingdom of Galicia-Maximiliano.jpg|Arms of the kingdom of
Galicia in the "Great Triumphal Chariot of Maximilian", Year 1515.
<File:Reino> de Galicia - Kingdom of Galicia - CarolumV.jpg|Arms of the
kingdom of Galicia in the *Historia originis et succesionis regnorum et
imperiorum a Noe usque ad Carolum V*, 1548. <File:Reino> de Galicia -
kingdom of Galicia - Hierosme.jpg|Arms of the kingdom od Galicia, *Le
blason des Armoiries*, Year 1581 <File:Escudo> reino de galicia.jpg|Arms
of the Kingdom of Galicia, illustrated in *L´armorial Le Blancq*,
Bibliothèque nationale de France, 16th century <File:Escudo-reyno> de
galizia.jpg|Arms of the Kingdom of Galicia, Pedro de Teixeira, 17th
century
[File:Cedulareinogaliza.jpg|Comercial](File:Cedulareinogaliza.jpg|Comercial)
Company of the Kingdom of Galicia, 18th century
[File:Reino\_de\_Galicia\_-kingdom\_of\_Galicia-troncoso.jpg|Arms](File:Reino_de_Galicia_-kingdom_of_Galicia-troncoso.jpg|Arms)
of the kingdom of Galicia, *Galicia.Reino de Christo Sacramentado y
primogénita de la Iglesia entre las gentes*, Year 1750. <File:Escudo> de
Galicia.svg|Arms of Galicia, today

Medieval cartography
--------------------

References
----------

-   Arias, Jorge C. (2007): [*Identity and Interaction: The Suevi and
    the
    Hispano-Romans*](http://www.scribd.com/doc/28736425/Hispano-Romans).
    University of Virginia.
-   Baliñas Pérez, C. (1998): *Gallegos del año mil*. Fundación Pedro
    Barrié de la Maza, A Coruña. ISBN 84-89748-27-6.
-   Barros Guimeráns, C. (1988): *A Mentalidade Xusticieira dos
    Irmandiños*. Xerais: Vigo. ISBN 84-7507-313-1.
-   Barros Guimeráns, C. (1994): [*¡Viva El Rey! Rey imaginario y
    revuelta en la Galicia
    bajomedieval*](http://gredos.usal.es/jspui/bitstream/10366/69803/1/¡Viva_el-Rey!_Rey_imaginario_y_revuelta_.pdf).
    Studia historica. Historia medieval (12): 83–101
-   Bishko, Charles Julian (1984). [*Spanish and Portuguese monastic
    history, 600–1300*](http://libro.uca.edu/monastic/monastic.htm).
    London: Variorum Reprints. pp. 22. ISBN 0-86078-136-4.
-   Carballeira Debasa, Ana María (2007). *Galicia y los gallegos en las
    fuentes árabes medievales*. Madrid: Consejo Superior de
    Investigaciones Cientifícas. ISBN 978-84-00-08576-6.
-   -   De la Gándara, Felipe (1677): [''Nobiliario, armas, y triunfos
    de
    Galicia"](http://books.google.es/books?id=Pi0_AAAAcAAJ&printsec=frontcover&hl=en#v=onepage&q&f=false).
    Julian de Paredes, Madrid.
-   Fletcher, Richard. A (1984): [*Saint James's catapult: the life and
    times of Diego Gelmírez of Santiago de
    Compostela*](http://libro.uca.edu/sjc/sjc.htm). ISBN
    978-0-19-822581-2.
-   García Oro, José (1987): *Galicia en los siglos XIV y XV*. Fundación
    "Pedro Barrie de la Maza, Conde de Fenosa", A Coruña. ISBN
    84-85728-59-9.
-   González López, Emilio (1978): *Grandeza e Decadencia do Reino de
    Galicia*. Galaxia, Vigo. ISBN 84-7154-303-6.
-   Isla Frez, Amancio (1992): *La sociedad gallega en la Alta Edad
    Media*. Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid.
    ISBN 84-00-07215-4.
-   Isla Frez, Amancio (1999): *Realezas hispánicas del año mil*.
    Ediciós do Castro, Sada (A Coruña). ISBN 84-7492-917-2.
-   López Carreira, Anselmo (1998): *O Reino de Galiza*. A Nosa Terra,
    Vigo. ISBN 978-84-89976-43-6
-   López Carreira, Anselmo (1999). *A cidade medieval galega* (1. ed.)
    Vigo: Edicions A Nosa Terra. ISBN 84-89976-60-0.
-   López Carreira, Anselmo (2005): *O Reino medieval de Galicia*. A
    Nosa Terra, Vigo. ISBN 978-84-8341-293-0
-   López Ferreiro, Antonio (1895): *Fueros municipales de Santiago y de
    su Tierra*.
-   Mariño Paz, Ramón (1998). *Historia da lingua galega* (2. ed.).
    Santiago de Compostela: Sotelo Blanco. ISBN 84-7824-333-X
-   Nogueira, C. (2001): *A Memoria da nación: o reino da Gallaecia*.
    Xerais, Vigo. 9788483026564
-   Portela Silva, Ermelindo (2001): "García II de Galicia, el rey y el
    reino (1065–1090)". La Olmeda, Burgos. ISBN 84-89915-16-4.
-   Queixas Zas, Mercedes (2001). *Historia xeral da literatura galega*.
    Vigo: A nosa terra. ISBN 84-95350-79-3.
-   Reilly, Bernard F. (1982): [*The kingdom of León-Castilla under
    Queen Urraca, 1109–1126*](http://libro.uca.edu/urraca/urraca.htm).
    Princeton U.P., Princeton, N.J. ISBN 978-0-691-05344-8.
-   Reilly, Bernard F. (1988): [*The Kingdom of León-Castilla under King
    Alfonso VII, 1126–1157*](http://libro.uca.edu/alfonso6/alfonso.htm).
    University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia. ISBN 0-8122-3452-9.
-   Rodríguez Fernández, Justianiano (1997): *García I, Ordoño II,
    Fruela II, Alfonso IV*. Editorial La Olmeda, Burgos. ISBN
    84-920046-8-1.
-   Souto Cabo, José Antonio (2008). *Documentos galego-portugueses dos
    séculos XII e XIII*. A Coruña: Universidade da Coruña. ISBN
    978-84-9749-314-7.
-   Thompson, E. A. (2002): [*Romans and barbarians: the decline of the
    Western
    Empire*](http://books.google.com/books?id=BiXgsE7vsjcC&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false).
    Univ of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 978-0-299-08704-3.
-   Torres Rodríguez, Casimiro (1977): *El Reino de los Suevos*.
    Fundación Barrié de la Maza, A Coruña. ISBN 84-85319-11-7.
-   Villacañas Berlanga, José Luis (2006) *La formación de los reinos
    hispánicos*. Pozuelo de Alarcón: Espasa Calpe. ISBN 84-670-2257-4.

Notes
-----

Category:History of Galicia|Kingdom of Galicia Category:History of Spain
Category:Medieval Portugal Category:1157 disestablishments
Category:States and territories established in 910 Category:Former
countries on the Iberian Peninsula|Galicia
