A **matryoshka doll** (, *matrëška*), also known as **Russian
nesting/nested doll**, refers to a set of wooden dolls of decreasing
size placed one inside the other. The first Russian nested doll set was
carved in 1890 by Vasily Zvyozdochkin from a design by Sergey Malyutin,
who was a folk crafts painter at Abramtsevo. Traditionally the outer
layer is a woman, dressed in a sarafan, a long and shapeless traditional
Russian peasant jumper dress. The figures inside may be of either
gender; the smallest, innermost doll is typically a baby turned from a
single piece of wood. Much of the artistry is in the painting of each
doll, which can be very elaborate. The dolls often follow a theme, the
themes vary, from fairy tale characters to Soviet leaders.

Design
------

A set of matryoshkas consist of a wooden figure which separates, top
from bottom, to reveal a smaller figure of the same sort inside, which
has, in turn, another figure inside of it, and so on. The number of
nested figures is traditionally not less than five, but can be much
more, up to several dozen with sufficiently fine craftsmanship. Modern
dolls often yield an odd number of figures but this is not an absolute
rule; the original Zvyozdochkin set, for instance, had an even number.
The form is approximately cylindrical, with a rounded top for the head,
tapering toward the bottom, with few or no protruding features; the
dolls have no hands (except those that are painted). Traditionally the
outer layer is a woman, dressed in a sarafan. The figures inside may be
of either gender; the smallest, innermost doll is typically a baby
lathed from a single small piece of wood (and hence non-opening). The
artistry is in the painting of each doll, which can be extremely
elaborate.

The word "matryoshka" (матрёшка), literally "little matron", is a
diminutive form of the Russian female first name "Matryona" (Матрёна).

History
-------

The first Russian nested doll set was carved in 1890 by Vasily
Zvyozdochkin from a design by Sergey Malyutin, who was a folk crafts
painter in the Abramtsevo estate of the Russian industrialist and patron
of arts Savva Mamontov. The doll set was painted by Malyutin. Malyutin's
doll set consisted of eight dolls—the outermost was a girl in a
traditional dress holding a rooster. The inner dolls were girls and a
boy, and the innermost a baby.

Zvyozdochkin and Malyutin were inspired by a doll from Honshu, the main
island of Japan. Sources differ in descriptions of the doll, describing
it as either a round, hollow daruma doll or a *fukuruma* nesting doll
portraying portly bald old Buddhist monk.

Savva Mamontov's wife presented the dolls at the Exposition Universelle
(1900) in Paris, where the toy earned a bronze medal. Soon after,
matryoshka dolls were being made in several places in Russia and shipped
around the world.

Themes
------

Matryoshka dolls are often designed to follow a particular theme, for
instance peasant girls in traditional dress, but the theme can be
anything, from fairy tale characters to Soviet leaders.

Modern artists create many new styles of nesting dolls. Common themes
include floral, Christmas, Easter, religious, animal collections,
portraits and caricatures of famous politicians, musicians, athletes,
astronauts, "robots" and popular movie stars. Matryoshka dolls that
feature communist leaders of Russia became very popular among Russian
people in the early 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union.
Today, some Russian artists specialize in painting themed matryoshka
dolls that feature specific categories of subjects, people or nature.
Areas with notable matryoshka styles include Sergiyev Posad, Semionovo
(now the town of Semyonov), Polkhovsky Maidan, and Kirov.

During Perestroika, the leaders of the Soviet Union became a common
theme depicted on matryoshkas. Starting with the largest, Mikhail
Gorbachev, then Leonid Brezhnev (Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko
almost never appear due to the short length of their respective terms),
then Nikita Khrushchev, Josef Stalin and finally the smallest, Vladimir
Lenin. Newer versions start with Dmitry Medvedev and then follow with
Vladimir Putin, Boris Yeltsin, Mikhail Gorbachev, Joseph Stalin and then
Vladimir Lenin. There are even ones that have Dmitry Medvedev, Vladimir
Putin, Boris Yeltsin, Mikhail Gorbachev, Leonid Brezhnev, Nikita
Khrushchev, Joseph Stalin, Vladimir Lenin, and finally Emperor Nicholas
II a total of 9 dolls.

As metaphor
-----------

Matryoshkas are also used metaphorically, as a design paradigm, known as
the "matryoshka principle" or "nested doll principle". It denotes a
recognizable relationship of "object-within-similar-object" that appears
in the design of many other natural and crafted objects. Examples of
this use include the Matrioshka brain and the Matroska media-container
format.

The "matryoshka principle" is also an example of Mise-en-abyme.
*Compare* with Fractal also.

The onion metaphor is of similar character. If the outer layer is peeled
off an onion, a similar onion exists within. This structure is employed
by designers in applications such as the layering of clothes or the
design of tables, where a smaller table nests within a larger table and
yet a smaller one within that.

The Matroska (MKV) multimedia container format derives its name from
Matryoshka, alluding to the fact that the same container can hold many
different types of content streams.

In media
--------

There is also a Vocaloid song entitled which is performed by Vocaloids
Miku Hatsune and Gumi Megpoid.

Production
----------

The dolls are constructed from one block of wood to create a proper fit;
different pieces of wood would have unique expansion-contraction
characteristics and moisture content. Production involves a turning
lathe along with various woodcarving knives and chisels. First, the
smallest doll (which cannot be taken apart) is made on a turning lathe,
and the size and shape will determine that of the larger dolls. Next,
the bottom and top halves of the next doll are made separately, with a
ring on the bottom made to fit into an inset on the top portion. The
upper part is placed on the lower half and allowed to dry, which
tightens the ring to its upper fitting to ensure the halves will close
securely. No measurements are made during this process; sizing to fit is
done by eye. After all the dolls are made, they are treated, painted,
and coated, before nesting them inside one another.

See also
--------

-   Chinese boxes
-   Recursion
-   Self-similarity
-   Stacking (video game)
-   Turducken
-   Droste effect

References
----------

External links
--------------

Category:1890s toys Category:Arts and crafts Category:Nested containers
Category:Russian culture Category:Russian inventions Category:Soviet
culture Category:Traditional dolls
