The Mongol Empire invaded Kievan Rus' in the 13th century, destroying
numerous cities including Ryazan, Kolomna, Moscow, Vladimir and Kiev.

This campaign, part of the Mongol invasion of Europe, was heralded by
the Battle of the Kalka River (1223) which resulted in a Mongol victory
over forces of several Rus' principalities. Nevertheless, the Mongols
retreated. Batu Khan's full-scale invasion of Rus' occurred from 1237 to
1240; the campaign was ended by a
Ögedei\_Khan\#Aftermath\_of\_.C3.96gedei.27s\_death|Mongol succession
crisis. All Russian states had to submit to Mongol rule and became part
of the Golden Horde empire; some of it lasted until 1480.

The invasion, facilitated by the beginning breakup of Kievan Rus' in the
13th century, had incalculable ramifications for the history of Eastern
Europe, including the division of the East Slavic people into three
separate nations (modern-day Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus) and the rise
of the Grand Duchy of Moscow.

Background
----------

As it was undergoing fragmentation, Kievan Rus' faced the unexpected
eruption of an irresistible foreign foe coming from the mysterious
regions of the Far East. "For our sins", writes the Rus' chronicler of
the time, "unknown nations arrived. No one knew their origin or whence
they came, or what religion they practiced. That is known only to God,
and perhaps to wise men learned in books".

The princes of Rus' first heard of the coming Mongol warriors from the
nomadic Cumans. Previously known for pillaging settlers on the frontier,
the nomads now preferred peaceful relations, warning their neighbors:
"These terrible strangers have taken our country, and tomorrow they will
take yours if you do not come and help us". In response to this call,
Mstislav the Bold and Mstislav Romanovich the Old joined forces and set
out eastward to meet the foe, only to be routed in 1223 at the Battle of
the Kalka River, a defeat remembered to this day in Russia and Ukraine.

Although this defeat left the Kievan principality at the mercy of
invaders, the Mongol forces retreated and did not reappear for thirteen
years, during which time the princes of Rus' went on quarreling and
fighting as before, until they were startled by a new and much more
formidable invading force.

Invasion of Batu Khan
---------------------

The vast Mongol hordes of around 35,000 mounted archers, commanded by
Batu Khan and Subutai, crossed the Volga River and invaded Volga
Bulgaria in the autumn of 1236. It took them a year to extinguish the
resistance of the Volga Bulgarians, the Kipchaks/Cumans and the Alani.

In November 1237, Batu Khan sent his envoys to the court of Yuri II of
Vladimir and demanded his submission. A month later, the hordes besieged
Ryazan. After six days of bloody battle, the city was totally
annihilated. Alarmed by the news, Yuri II sent his sons to detain the
invaders, but they were soundly defeated. Having burnt down Kolomna and
Moscow, the horde laid siege to Vladimir on February 4, 1238. Three days
later, the capital of Vladimir-Suzdal was taken and burnt to the ground.
The royal family perished in the fire, while the grand prince retreated
northward. Crossing the Volga, he mustered a new army, which was totally
annihilated by the Mongols in the Battle of the Sit River on March 4.

Thereupon Batu Khan divided his army into smaller units, which ransacked
fourteen cities of modern-day Russia: Rostov, Uglich, Yaroslavl,
Kostroma, Kashin, Ksnyatin, Gorodets, Galich, Pereslavl-Zalessky,
Yuriev-Polsky, Dmitrov, Volokolamsk, Tver, and Torzhok. The most
difficult to take was the small town of Kozelsk, whose boy-prince
Vasily, son of Titus, and inhabitants resisted the Mongols for seven
weeks, killing 4,000. As the story goes, at the news of the Mongol
approach, the whole town of Kitezh with all its inhabitants was
submerged into a lake, where, as legend has it, it may be seen to this
day. The only major cities to escape destruction were Novgorod and
Pskov. The Mongols were advancing to Novgorod, but unexpectedly turned
back at the site mentioned as Ignach Cross, of which the exact location
is not known. Refugees from southern Rus' moved mostly to the northeast,
into the forested region with poor soils between the upper Volga and the
Oka Rivers.

In the summer of 1238, Batu Khan devastated the Crimea and pacified
Mordovia. In the winter of 1239, he sacked Chernigov and Pereyaslav.
After many days of siege, the horde stormed Kiev in December 1240.
Despite the resistance of Danylo of Halych, Batu Khan managed to take
two of his principal cities, Halych and Volodymyr-Volynskyi. The Mongols
then resolved to "reach the ultimate sea", where they could proceed no
further, and invaded Hungary and Poland.

Chinese siege engines were used by the Mongols under Tului to raze the
walls of Russian cities.

The age of Tatar rule
---------------------

This time the invaders came to stay, and they built for themselves a
capital, called Sarai, on the lower Volga. Here the commander of the
Golden Horde, as the western section of the Mongol empire was called,
fixed his golden headquarters and represented his sovereign the grand
khan who lived with the Great Horde in the Orkhon Valley. Here they had
their headquarters and held parts of Rus' in subjection for nearly three
centuries. All of the Russian states, including Novgorod, Smolensk,
Galich, and Pskov, submitted to the Mongol rule.

The term by which this subjection is commonly designated, the Mongol or
Tatar "yoke", suggests ideas of terrible oppression, but in reality
these nomadic invaders from Mongolia were not such cruel, oppressive
taskmasters as is generally supposed. In the first place, they never
settled in the country, and they had little direct dealing with the
inhabitants. In accordance with the admonitions of Genghis to his
children and grandchildren, they retained their pastoral mode of life,
so that the subject races, agriculturists, and dwellers in towns, were
not disturbed in their ordinary avocations.

In religious matters they were extremely tolerant. When they first
appeared in Europe, they were shamanists, and as such they had naturally
no religious fanaticism. After adopting Islam they remained as tolerant
as before, and the khan of the Golden Horde, who first became a Muslim,
allowed the Rus' to found a Christian bishopric in his capital. Nogai
Khan, half a century later, married a daughter of the Byzantine emperor,
and gave his own daughter in marriage to a Rus' prince, Theodor the
Black. Some modern Russian historians (most notably, the Soviet era
historian and "Neo-Eurasianist" ideologist Lev Gumilev) even postulate
there was no invasion at all. According to them, the Rus' princes
concluded a defensive alliance with the Horde in order to repel attacks
of the fanatical Teutonic Knights, which posed a much greater threat to
Rus' religion and culture.

These represent the bright side of Tatar rule. It had its dark side
also. So long as a great horde of nomads was encamped on the frontier,
the country was liable to be invaded by an overwhelming force.
Fortunately, these invasions were not frequent but when they occurred
they caused an incalculable amount of devastation and suffering. In the
intervals the people had to pay a fixed tribute. At first it was
collected in a rough-and-ready fashion by Tatar tax-gatherers, by about
1259 it was regulated by a census of the population, and finally its
collection was entrusted to the native princes, so that the people were
no longer brought into direct contact with the Tatar officials.

Impact on development
---------------------

The influence of the Mongol invasion on the territories of Kievan Rus'
was uneven. Colin McEvedy (*Atlas of World Population History, 1978*)
estimates the population of European Russia dropped from 7.5 million
prior to the invasion to 7 million afterwards. Centers such as Kiev took
centuries to rebuild and recover from the devastation of the initial
attack. The Novgorod Republic continued to prosper, however, and new
entities, the rival cities of Moscow and Tver, began to flourish under
the Mongols. Indeed, Moscow's eventual dominance of northern and eastern
Rus' was in large part attributable to the Mongols. After the prince of
Tver joined a rebellion against the Mongols 1327, his rival prince Ivan
I of Moscow joined the Mongols in crushing Tver and devastating its
lands. By doing so he eliminated his rival, allowed the Russian Orthodox
Church to move its headquarters to Moscow, and was granted the title of
Grand prince by the Mongols. As such, the Muscovite prince became the
chief intermediary between the Mongol overlords and the Rus' lands,
which paid further dividends to Moscow's rulers. While the Mongols often
raided other areas of Rus, they tended to respect the lands controlled
by their principal collaborator. This, in turn, attracted nobles and
their servants who sought to settle in the relatively secure and
peaceful Moscow lands.

Although Russian forces defeated the Golden Horde at the Battle of
Kulikovo in 1380, Mongol domination of parts of Rus' territories, with
the requisite demands of tribute, continued until the Great stand on the
Ugra river in 1480.

Certainly, it can be (and often is) argued that without the Mongol
destruction of Kievan Rus' that the Tsardom of Russia, and subsequently
the Russian Empire, would not have risen. Trade routes with the East
came through the Rus' lands, making them a center for trade from both
worlds. In short, the Mongol influence, while destructive in the extreme
to their enemies, had a significant long term effect on the rise of
modern Russia, Ukraine and Belarus.

Influence on Rus' society
-------------------------

Historians have debated the long-term influence of Mongol rule on Rus'
society. The Mongols have been blamed for the destruction of Kievan
Rus', the breakup of the ancient Rus' nationality into three components,
and the introduction of the concept of "oriental despotism" into Russia.
Historians also credit the Mongol regime with an important role in the
development of Muscovy as a state. Under Mongol occupation, for example,
Muscovy developed its mestnichestvo hierarchy, postal road network
(based on Mongolian *ortoo* system, known in Russian as "yam", hence the
terms *yamshchik*, *Yamskoy Prikaz*, etc.), census, fiscal system, and
military organization.

The period of Mongol rule over Russia included significant cultural and
interpersonal contacts between the Russian and Mongolian ruling classes.
By 1450, the Tatar language had become fashionable in the court of the
Grand Prince of Moscow, Vasily II, who was accused of excessive love of
the Tatars and their speech, and many Russian noblemen adopted Tatar
surnames (for example, a member of the Veliamanov family adopted the
Turkic name "Aksak" and his descendents were the Aksakovs) Many Russian
boyar (noble) families traced their descent from the Mongols or Tatars,
including Veliaminov-Zernov, Godunov, Arseniev, Bakhmetev, Bulgakov
(descendents of Bulgak) and Chaadaev (descendents of Genghis Khan's son
Jagatay). In a survey of Russian noble families of the 17th century,
over 15% of the Russian noble families had Tatar or Oriental origins.
The Mongols brought about changes in economics power of states and
overall trade. In the religious sphere, St. Paphnutius of Borovsk was
the grandson of a Mongol baskak, or tax collector, while a nephew of
khan Bergai of the Golden Horde converted to Christianity and became
known as the monk St. Peter Tsarevich of the Horde

In the judicial sphere, under Mongol influence capital punishment, which
during the times of Kievan Rus' had only been applied to slaves, became
widespread and the use of torture became a regular part of criminal
procedure. Specific punishments introduced in Moscow included beheading
for alleged traitors, branding of thieves (with execution for a third
arrest).
