**Music of Russia** denotes music produced in Russia and/or by the
Russians. Russia is a large and culturally diverse country, with many
ethnic groups, each with their own locally developed music. Russian
music also includes significant contributions from ethnic minorities,
who populated the Russian Empire, the Soviet Union and modern-day
Russia.

Russian music went through a long history, beginning from ritual folk
song and the sacred music of the Russian Orthodox Church. The 19th
century saw the rise of highly acclaimed Russian classical music, and in
20th century major contributions by various Soviet composers and
emigrees, while the modern styles of Russian popular music developed,
including Russian rock and Russian pop.

History
-------

### Early history

Written documents exist that describe the musical culture of Rus'. The
most popular kind of instruments in medieval Russia were thought to have
been string instruments, such as the gusli or gudok. Archeologists have
uncovered examples of these instruments in the Novgorod region dating as
early as 11th century. (Novgorod republic had deep traditions in music;
its most popular folk hero and the chief character of several epics was
Sadko, a gusli player). Other instruments in common use include flutes
(svirel), and percussive instruments such as the treshchotka and the
*buben*. The most popular form of music, however was singing. Bylinas
(epic ballads) about folk heroes such as Sadko, Ilya Muromets, and
others were often sung, sometimes to instrumental accompaniment. The
texts of some of these epics have been recorded.

In the period of Muscovy, two major genres formed Russian music: the
sacred music of the Orthodox Church and secular music used for
entertainment. The sacred music draws its tradition from the Byzantine
Empire, with key elements being used in Russian Orthodox bell ringing,
as well as choral singing. Neumes were developed for musical notation,
and as a result several examples of medieval sacred music have survived
to this day, among them two stichera composed by Tsar Ivan IV in the
16th century.

Secular music included the use of musical instruments such as fipple
flutes and string instruments, and was usually played on holidays
initially by skomorokhs — jesters and minstrels who entertained the
nobility. During the reactionary period of the Great Russian Schism in
the 17th century, skomorokhs along with their form of secular music were
banned from plying their trade numerous times, but despite these
restrictions, some of their traditions survived to the present day.

### 18th and 19th century: Russian classical music

Russia was a late starter in developing a native tradition of classical
music due to the proscription by the Orthodox Church against secular
music. Beginning in the reign of Ivan IV, the Imperial Court invited
Western composers and musicians to fill this void. By the time of Peter
I, these artists were a regular fixture at Court. While not personally
inclined toward music, Peter saw European music as a mark of
civilization and a way of Westernizing the country; his establishment of
the Western-style city of Saint Petersburg helped foster its spread to
the rest of the upper classes. A craze for Italian opera at Court during
the reigns of Empresses Elisabeth and Catherine also helped spread
interest in Western music among the aristocracy. This craze became so
pervasive that many were not even aware that Russian composers existed.

The focus on European music meant that Russian composers had to write in
Western style if they wanted their compositions to be performed. Their
success at this was variable due to a lack of familiarity with European
rules of composition. Some composers were able to travel abroad for
training, usually to Italy, and learned to compose vocal and
instrumental works in the Italian Classical tradition popular in the
day. These include ethnic Ukrainian composers Dmitri Bortniansky, Maksim
Berezovsky and Artem Vedel.

The first great Russian composer to exploit native Russian music
traditions into the realm of secular music was Mikhail Glinka
(1804–1857), who composed the early Russian language operas *Ivan
Susanin* and *Ruslan and Lyudmila*. They were neither the first operas
in the Russian language nor the first by a Russian, but they gained fame
for relying on distinctively Russian tunes and themes and being in the
vernacular.

Russian folk music became the primary source for the younger generation
composers. A group that called itself "The Mighty Five", headed by
Balakirev (1837–1910) and including Rimsky-Korsakov (1844–1908),
Mussorgsky (1839–81), Borodin (1833–87) and César Cui (1835–1918),
proclaimed its purpose to compose and popularize Russian national
traditions in classical music. Among the Mighty Five's most notable
compositions were the operas *The Snow Maiden* (*Snegurochka*), *Sadko*,
*Boris Godunov*, *Prince Igor*, *Khovanshchina*, and symphonic suite
*Scheherazade*. Many of the works by Glinka and the Mighty Five were
based on Russian history, folk tales and literature, and are regarded as
masterpieces of romantic nationalism in music.

This period also saw the foundation of the Russian Musical Society (RMS)
in 1859, led by composer-pianists Anton (1829–94) and Nikolay Rubinstein
(1835–81). The Mighty Five was often presented as the Russian Music
Society's rival, with the Five embracing their Russian national identity
and the RMS being musically more conservative. However the RMS founded
Russia's first Conservatories in St Petersburg and in Moscow: the former
trained the great Russian composer Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky (1840–93),
best known for ballets like *Swan Lake*, *Sleeping Beauty*, and *The
Nutcracker*. He remains Russia's best-known composer outside Russia.
Easily the most famous successor in his style is Sergey Rakhmaninov
(1873–1943), who studied at the Moscow Conservatory (where Tchaikovsky
himself taught).

The late 19th and early 20th century saw the third wave of Russian
classics: Igor Stravinsky (1882–1971), Alexander Scriabin (1872–1915),
Sergei Prokofiev (1891–1953) and Dmitri Shostakovich (1906–1975). They
were experimental in style and musical language. Stravinsky was
particularly influential on his contemporaries and subsequent
generations of composers, both in Russia and across Europe and the
United States. Stravinsky permanently emigrated after the Russian
revolution. Although Prokofiev also left Russia in 1918, he eventually
returned and contributed to Soviet music.

In the late 19th to early 20th centuries, the so-called "romance songs"
became very popular. The greatest and most popular singers of the
"romances" usually sang in operas at the same time. The most popular was
Fyodor Shalyapin. Singers usually composed music and wrote the lyrics,
as did Alexander Vertinsky, Konstantin Sokolsky, Pyotr Leshchenko. á

### 20th century: Soviet music

After the Russian Revolution, Russian music changed dramatically. The
early 1920s were the era of avant-garde experiments, inspired by the
"revolutionary spirit" of the era. New trends in music (like music based
on synthetic chords) were proposed by enthusiastic clubs such as
Association for Contemporary Music. Arseny Avraamov pioneered the
graphical sound, and Leon Theremin invented thereminvox, one of the
early electronic instruments.

However, in the 1930s, under the regime of Joseph Stalin, music was
forced to be contained within certain boundaries of content and
innovation. Classicism was favoured, and experimentation discouraged. (A
notable example: Shostakovich's veristic opera Lady Macbeth of the
Mtsensk District was denounced in Pravda newspaper as "formalism" and
soon removed from theatres for years).

The music patriarchs of the era were Prokofiev, Shostakovich, Aram
Khachaturian and Alexander Alexandrov, the latter is best known for
composing the Anthem of the Soviet Union and the song *The Sacred War*.
With time, a wave of younger Soviet composers, such as Georgy Sviridov,
Alfred Schnittke, and Sofia Gubaidulina took the forefront due to the
rigorous Soviet education system. The Union of Soviet Composers was
established in 1932 and became the major regulatory body for Soviet
music.

Jazz was introduced to Soviet audiences by Valentin Parnakh in the
1920s. Singer Leonid Uteosov and film score composer Isaak Dunayevsky
helped its popularity, especially with the popular comedy movie Jolly
Fellows that featured a jazz soundtrack. Eddie Rosner, Oleg Lundstrem
and others contributed to soviet jazz music.

Film soundtracks produced a significant part of popular Soviet/Russian
songs of the time, as well as of orchestral and experimental music. The
1930s saw Prokofiev's scores for Sergei Eisenstein's epic movies, and
also soundtracks by Isaak Dunayevsky that ranged from classical pieces
to popular jazz. Notable film composers from late Soviet era included
Vladimir Dashkevich, Tikhon Khrennikov, Alexander Zatsepin, Gennady
Gladkov, among others.

Among the notable people of Soviet electronic music were Vyacheslav
Mescherin, creator of Electronic Instruments Orchestra, and ambient
composer Eduard Artemiev, best known for his scores to Tarkovsky's
science fiction films.

The 1960s and 1970s saw the beginning of modern Russian pop and rock
music. It started with the wave of VIA's (vocal-instrumental ensemble),
a specific sort of music bands performing radio-friendly pop, rock and
folk, composed by members of the Union of Composers and approved by
censorship. This wave begun with Pojuschie Gitary and Pesnyary; popular
VIA bands also included Tcvety, Zemlyane and Verasy. That period of
music also saw individual pop stars such as Iosif Kobzon, Sofia Rotaru,
Alla Pugacheva, Valery Leontiev, Yuri Antonov. Many of them remain
popular to this day. They were the mainstream of Soviet music media,
headliners of festivals such as Song of the Year, Sopot, and Golden
Orpheus. The year 1977 saw also establishment of Moskovsky Komsomolets
hit parade, the Russia's first music chart.

Music publishing and promotion in Soviet Union was a state monopoly. To
earn money and fame from their talent, Soviet musicians had to assign to
state-owned label Melodiya. This meant to accept certain boundaries of
experimentation, that is, the family-friendly performance and
politically neutral lyrics favoured by censors. Meanwhile, with the
arrival of new sound recording technologies, it became possible for
common fans to record and exchange their music via magnetic tape
recorders. This helped underground music subculture (such as bard and
rock music) to flourish despite being ignored by the state-owned media.

"Bardic" or "authors' song" (*авторская песня*) is an umbrella term for
the singers-songwriters movement that arose at the early 1960s. It can
be compared to the American folk revival movement of the 60s, with their
simple single-guitar arrangements and poetical lyrics. Initially ignored
by the state media, bards like Vladimir Vysotsky, Bulat Okudzhava,
Alexander Galich gained so much popularity that they finished being
distributed by the state owned Melodiya record company. The largest
festival of bard music is Grushinsky festival, held annually since 1968.

Rock music came to Soviet Union in the late 1960s with Beatlemania, and
many rock bands arose during the late 1970s: Mashina Vremeni, Aquarium,
Autograph. Unlike the VIAs, these bands were not allowed to publish
their music and remained in underground. The "golden age" of Russian
rock is widely considered to have been the 1980s. Censorship mitigated,
rock clubs opened in Leningrad and Moscow, and soon rock became
mainstream Popular bands of that time include Kino, Alisa, Aria, DDT,
Nautilus Pompilius, and Grazhdanskaya Oborona. New wave and post punk
were the trend in 80s Russian rock.

### 21st century: modern Russian music

Russian pop music is well developed, and enjoys mainstream success via
pop music media such as MTV Russia, Muz TV and various radio stations. A
number of pop artists have broken through in recent years. The Russian
duet t.A.T.u. is the most successful Russian pop band of its time. They
have reached number one in many countries around the world, with several
of their singles and albums. Other popular artists include the
Eurovision 2008 winner Dima Bilan, as well as Valery Meladze, VIA Gra,
Nyusha, Vintage, Philipp Kirkorov, Vitas and Alsou. Music producers like
Igor Krutoy, Maxim Fadeev, Ivan Shapovalov, Igor Matvienko, and
Konstantin Meladze control a major share of Russia's pop music market,
in some ways continuing the Soviet style of artist management. On the
other side, some independent acts such as Neoclubber use new-era promo
tools to avoid these Soviet old-fashioned ways in reaching their fans.
Russian girl trio Serebro are one of the most popular Russian acts to
dominate charts outside of the European market. The group's most known
single "Mama Lover" charted in the US Billboard Charts, becoming the
first Russian act to chart since t.A.T.u.'s single "All The Things She
Said".

The rock music scene has gradually evolved from the united movement into
several different subgenres similar to those found in the West. There's
youth pop rock and alternative rock (Mumiy Troll, Zemfira, Splean, Bi-2,
Zveri). There's punk rock, ska and grunge (Korol i Shut, Pilot,
Leningrad, Distemper, Elisium). The heavy metal scene has grown
substantially, with new bands playing Power and Progressive Metal
(Catharsis, Epidemia, Shadow Host, Mechanical Poet), and Pagan Metal
(Arkona, Butterfly Temple, Temnozor).

Rock music media has become prevalent in modern Russia. The most notable
is Nashe Radio, which is promoting classic rock and pop punk. Its *Chart
Dozen* (Чартова дюжина) is the main rock chart in Russia, and its
Nashestvie rock festival attracts around 100,000 fans annually and was
dubbed "Russian Woodstock" by the media. Others include A-One TV
channel, specializing in alternative music and hardcore. It has promoted
bands like Amatory, Tracktor Bowling and Slot, and awarded many of them
with its Russian Alternative Music Prize. Radio Maximum broadcasts both
Russian and western modern pop and rock as well.

Other types of music include folk rock (Melnitsa), trip hop (Linda) and
reggae (Jah Division). Hip Hop/Rap is represented by Bad Balance, Kasta,
Ligalize and Mnogotochie. There's also an experimental rapcore scene
headlined by Dolphin and Kirpichi.

A specific, exclusively Russian kind of music has emerged, that mixes
criminal songs, bard and romance music. It is labelled "Russian chanson"
(a neologism popularized by its main promoter, Radio Chanson). Its main
artists include Mikhail Krug, Mikhail Shufutinsky, and Alexander
Rosenbaum. With lyrics about daily life and society, and frequent
romanticisation of the criminal underworld, chanson is especially
popular among adult males of the lower social class.

Electronic music in modern Russia is underdeveloped in comparison to
other genres. This is largely due to a lack of promotion. There are some
independent underground acts performing IDM, downtempo, house, trance
and dark psytrance (including tracker music scene), and broadcasting
their work via internet radio. They include Parasense, Fungus Funk,
Kindzadza, Lesnikov-16, Yolochnye Igrushki and Messer Für Frau Müller.
Of the few artists that broke through to the mainstream media, there are
PPK and DJ Groove, that exploit Soviet movie soundtracks for their dance
remixes. In 2000's the Darkwave and Industrial scene, closely related to
Goth subculture, has become prevalent, with such artists as Dvar, Otto
Dix, Stillife, Theodor Bastard, Roman Rain, Shmeli and Biopsychoz.

The profile of "Classical" or concert hall music has to a considerable
degree been eclipsed by on one hand the rise of commercial popular music
in Russia, and on the other its own lack of promotion since the collapse
of the USSR. Yet a number of composers born in the 1950s and later have
made some impact, notably Leonid Desyatnikov who became the first
composer in decades to have a new opera commissioned by the Bolshoi
Theatre (*Rosenthal's Children*, 2005), and whose music has been
championed by Gidon Kremer and Roman Mints. Meanwhile Gubaidulina,
amongst several former-Soviet composers of her generation, continues to
maintain a high profile outside Russia composing several prestigious and
well-received works including "In tempus praesens" (2007) for the
violinist Anne-Sophie Mutter.

Early 2000s saw a boom of musicals in Russia. Notre-Dame de Paris,
Nord-Ost, Roméo et Juliette, de la Haine à l'Amour|Roméo et Juliette, We
Will Rock You were constantly performed in Moscow theatres at the time.
The popularity of musicals was hampered by the 2002 Moscow theater
hostage crisis and only revived at the end of decade.

Ethnic roots music
------------------

Russia today is a multi-ethnic state with over 300 ethnicities living
under one flag. Each of these ethnic groups has their own indigenous
folk, sacred and in some cases art music, which can loosely be
categorized together under the guise of Ethnic roots music, or folk
music. This category can further be broken down into folkloric (modern
adaptations of folk material, and authentic presentations of ethnic
music).

### Adygea

In recent years, Adygea has seen the formation of a number of new
musical institutions. These include two orchestras, one of which
(Russkaya Udal), uses folk instruments, and a chamber music theater.

Adygea's national anthem was written by Iskhak Shumafovich Mashbash with
music by Umar Khatsitsovich Tkhabisimov. اليافعي

### Altay

Altay is a Central Asian region, known for traditional epics and a
number of folk instruments.

### Bashkir

The first major study of Bashkir music appeared in 1897, when
ethnographer Rybakov S.G. wrote *Music and Songs of the Ural's Muslims
and Studies of Their Way of Life*. Later, Lebedinskiy L.N. collected
numerous folk songs in Bashkortostan beginning in 1930. The 1968
foundation of the Ufa State Institute of Arts sponsored research in the
field.

The kurai is the most important instrument in the Bashkir ensemble.

### Buryatia

The Buryats of the far east is known for distinctive folk music which
uses the two-stringed horsehead fiddle, or morin khuur. The style has no
polyphony and has little melodic innovation. Narrative structures are
very common, many of them long epics which claim to be the last song of
a famous hero, such as in the *Last Song of Rinchin Dorzhin*. Modern
Buryat musicians include the band Uragsha, which uniquely combines
Siberian and Russian language lyrics with rock and Buryat folk songs.

### Chechnya

Alongside the Chechen rebellion of the 1990s came a resurgence in
Chechen national identity, of which music is a major part. People like
Said Khachukayev became prominent promoting Chechen music.

The Chechen national anthem is said to be "Death or Freedom", an ancient
song of uncertain origin.

### Dagestan

Dagestan's most famous composer may be Gotfrid Hasanov, who is said to
be the first professional composer from Dagestan. He wrote the first
Dagestani opera, *Khochbar*, in 1945 and recorded a great deal of folk
music from all the peoples of Dagestan.

### Karelia

Karelians are Finnish, and so much of their music is the same as Finnish
music. The *Kalevala* is a very important part of traditional music; it
is a recitation of Finnish legends, and is considered an integral part
of the Finnish folk identity.

The Karelian Folk Music Ensemble is a prominent folk group.

### Ossetia

Ossetians are people of the Caucasian Region, and thus has similar
themes to Music of Chechnya and Music of Dagestan.

### Russia

Archeology and direct evidence show a variety of musical instruments in
ancient Russia. Authentic folk instruments include the Livenka
(accordion) and woodwinds like zhaleika, svirel and kugikli, as well as
numerous percussion instruments: buben, bubenci, kokshnik, korobochka,
lozhki, rubel, treschetka, vertushka and zvonchalka.

Chastushkas are a kind of Russian folk song with a long history. They
are typically rapped, and are humorous or satiric.

During the 19th century, Count Uvarov led a campaign of nationalist
revival which initiated the first professional orchestra with
traditional instruments, beginning with Vasily Andreyev, who used the
balalaika in an orchestra late in the century. Just after the dawn of
the 20th century, Mitrofan Pyatnitsky founded the Pyatnitsky Choir,
which used rural peasant singers and traditional sounds.

### Sakha

Shamanism remains an important cultural practice of the ethnic groups of
Siberia and Sakhalin, where several dozen groups live. The Yakuts are
the largest, and are known for their olonkho songs and the khomus, a jaw
harp.

### Tatarstan

Tatar folk music has rhythmic peculiarities and pentatonic intonation in
common with nations of the Volga area, who are ethnically Finno-Ugric
and Turkic. Singing girls, renowned for their subtlety and grace, are a
prominent component of Tatar folk music. Instruments include the kubyz
(violin), quray (flute) and talianka (accordion).

### Tuva

Tuvan throat singing, or xoomii, is famous worldwide, primarily for its
novelty. The style is highly unusual and foreign to most listeners, who
typically find it inaccessible and amelodic. In throat singing, the
natural harmonic resonances of the lips and mouth are tuned to select
certain overtones. The style was first recorded by Ted Levin, who helped
catalogue a number of different styles. These are include borbannadir
(which is compared to the sound of a flowing river), sygyt (similar to
whistling), xoomii, chylandyk (likened to chirping crickets) and
ezengileer (like a horses trotting). Of particular international fame
are the group Huun-Huur-Tu and master throat singer Kongar-ool Ondar.

### Ukrainian music

Although Ukraine is an independent country since 1991, Ukrainians
constitute the second-largest ethnic minority in Russia. The bandura is
the most important and distinctive instrument of the Ukrainian folk
tradition, and was utilized by court musicians in the various Tsarist
courts. The kobzars, a kind of wandering performers who composed *dumy*,
or folk epics. Many of the early classical composers of Russia such as
Dmitry Bortniansky, Maksym Berezovsky and Artemy Vedel and a significant
number of others were of Ukrainian descent.
