**Ober Ost** is short for *Oberbefehlshaber der gesamten Deutschen
Streitkräfte im Osten*, which is a German term meaning "Supreme
Commander of All German Forces in the East" during World War I. In
practice it refers not only to said commander, but also to his governing
military staff and the district they controlled - Ober Ost was in
command of the Eastern front. After the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk it
controlled Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Belarus, parts of Poland, and
Courland: former territories of the Russian Empire. The land it
controlled was around 108,808 km². The Ober Ost was created in 1914, and
its first leader was Paul von Hindenburg, a Prussian military hero. When
the Chief of the General Staff Erich von Falkenhayn was dismissed from
office in 1916, von Hindenburg replaced him, and Prince Leopold of
Bavaria was given control of the Ober Ost.

Policies
--------

Ober Ost ruled the land with an iron fist. The movement policy or
"Verkehrspolitik", divided the land without regard to the existing
social and ethnic organization and patterns. One was not allowed to move
between the districts, which destroyed the livelihood of many merchant
Jews and prevented indigenous people from visiting friends and relatives
in neighboring districts. They also tried to "civilize" the people in
the Ober Ost controlled land, attempting to integrate German ideals and
institutions with existing cultures. They brought in railroads but only
Germans were allowed to ride them and schools were taught by German
instructors, since they had not trained Lithuanians.

In 1915, when large territories came under Ober Ost's administration as
a result of military successes on the Eastern Front Erich Ludendorff,
von Hindenburg's second in command, set up a system of managing the
large area now under its jurisdiction. Although von Hindenburg was
technically in command, it was Ludendorff who was in control of the
administration. There were ten staff members, each with a speciality
(finance, agriculture, etc.). The area was divided into the Courland
District, the Lithuania District and the Bialystok-Grodno District, each
overseen by a district commander. Ludendorff's plan was to make Ober Ost
a colonial territory for the settlement of his troops after the war as
well as provide a haven for German refugees from inner Russia.
Ludendorff quickly organized Ober Ost so that it was a self-sustaining
region, growing all its own food and even exporting surpluses to Berlin.
The largest resource was one that Ludendorff was unable to exploit
without difficulty. The locals had no interest in helping obtain a
German victory as they had no say in their government and were subject
to increasing requisitions and taxes.

Communication with locals
-------------------------

There were a great many problems with communication with indigenous
persons within the Ober Ost. Among the upper class locals the soldiers
could get by with French or German and in large villages the Jewish
population would speak German or Yiddish, "which the Germans would
somehow comprehend". In the rural areas and amongst peasant populations
soldiers had to rely on interpreters who spoke Latvian, Russian or both.
These language problems were not helped by the thinly stretched
administrations, which would sometimes number 100 men in an area as
large as Rhode Island. The clergy were at times relied upon to spread
messages to the masses, since this was an effective way of spreading a
message to people who speak a different language. A young
officer-administrator named Vagts relates that he listened (through a
translator) to a sermon by a priest who tells his congregation to stay
off highways after nightfall, hand in firearms and not to have anything
to do with Bolshevist agents, exactly as Vagts had told him to do
earlier.

Russian revolution
------------------

Given the uncertain situation caused by the Russian October Revolution
in 1917 and the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918, some indigenes
elected Duke Adolf Friedrich of Mecklenburg as head of the United Baltic
Duchy, and the second duke of Urach as king of Lithuania, but these
plans collapsed in November 1918.

Administrative divisions
------------------------

The Ober Ost was divided into three *Verwaltungsgebiete* (administrative
territories): Courland, Lithuania, and Bialystok-Grodno.

The total area was 108,808 km^2^, containing a population of 2,909,935
(by the end of 1916).

Main military units in 1919
---------------------------

-   the 10th Army, Commanding Officer Erich von Falkenhayn, Grodno
-   the Heeresgruppe Kiew

Aftermath
---------

With the end of the war and collapse of the empire, the Germans started
to withdraw, sometimes in a piecemeal and unorganized way, from Ober-Ost
around late 1918 and early 1919. In the vacuum left by their retreat, a
series of conflicts arose as various ethnic groups (Poles, Balts,
Ukrainians) tried to create states, clashing with each other and with
the various factions of the Russian Revolution. Winston Churchill
commented: "The war of giants has ended, the wars of the pygmies began."
For details, see:

-   Soviet westward offensive of 1918–1919, part of the Polish-Soviet
    War (the largest of the resulting conflicts)
-   Ukrainian-Soviet War and Ukrainian-Polish War
-   Estonian War of Independence, Latvian War of Independence,
    Lithuanian War of Independence

Parallels with Nazi German policy
---------------------------------

Vejas Gabriel Liulevicius postulates in his book *War Land on the
Eastern Front: Culture, National Identity, and German Occupation in
World War I*, that a line can be traced from Ober Ost's policies and
assumptions to Nazi Germany's plans and attitudes towards Eastern
Europe. His main argument is that "German troops developed a revulsion
towards the 'East', and came to think of it as a timeless region beset
by chaos, disease and barbarism", instead of what it really was, a
region suffering from the ravages of warfare. He claims that the
encounter with the East formed an idea of 'spaces and races' that needed
to be "cleared and cleansed". Although he has garnered a great deal of
evidence for his thesis, including government documents, letters and
diaries, in German and Lithuanian, there are still problems with his
work. For example he does not say much about the reception of German
policies by native populations. Also, he "makes almost no attempt to
relate wartime occupation policies and practice in Ober Ost to those in
Germany's colonial territories overseas".
