Image:Kustodiev The Bolshevik.jpg|thumb|300px|*Bolshevik* (1920), by
Boris Kustodiev

The **October Revolution**, officially known as the **Great October
Socialist Revolution**, and commonly referred to as **Red October**,
the **October Uprising** or the **Bolshevik Revolution**, was a seizure
of state power instrumental in the larger Russian Revolution of 1917. It
took place with an armed insurrection in Petrograd traditionally dated
to 25 October 1917 (by the Julian or Old Style calendar, which
corresponds to 7 November 1917 in the Gregorian or New Style calendar).

It followed and capitalized on the February Revolution of the same year,
which overthrew the Tsarist autocracy and established a provisional
government composed predominantly of former nobles and aristocrats.
During this time, urban workers began to organize into councils
(Russian: *Soviet*) wherein revolutionaries criticized the provisional
government and its actions. The October Revolution in Petrograd
overthrew the provisional government and gave the power to the local
soviets dominated by the majority (Russian: *Bolshevik*) faction of the
Russian Social Democratic Labour Party. This immediately initiated the
establishment of the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, the
world's first self-proclaimed socialist state. As the revolution was not
universally recognized outside of Petrograd there followed the struggles
of the Russian Civil War (1917–1922) and the creation of the Soviet
Union in 1922.

The revolution was led by the Bolsheviks, who used their influence in
the Petrograd Soviet to organize the armed forces. Bolshevik Red Guards
forces under the Military Revolutionary Committee began the takeover of
government buildings on 24 October 1917 (O.S.). The following day, the
Winter Palace (the seat of the Provisional government located in
Petrograd, then capital of Russia), was captured.

Etymology
---------

Initially, the event was referred as the *October coup* (Октябрьский
переворот) or the *Uprising of 25th*, as seen in contemporary documents
(for example, in the first editions of Lenin's complete works). In
Russian, however, "переворот" has a similar meaning to "revolution" and
also means "upheaval" or "overturn", so "coup" is not necessarily the
right translation. With time, the term *October Revolution* (Октябрьская
революция) came into use. It is also known as the "November Revolution"
having occurred in November according to the Gregorian Calendar.

The Great October Socialist Revolution (, *Velikaya Oktyabr'skaya
sotsialisticheskaya revolyutsiya*) was the official name for the October
Revolution in the Soviet Union after the 10th anniversary of the
Revolution in 1927.

Background
----------

The February Revolution had toppled Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, and
replaced his government with the Russian Provisional Government.
However, the provisional government was weak and riven by internal
dissension. It continued to wage World War I, which became increasingly
unpopular. A nationwide crisis developed in Russia, affecting social,
economic, and political relations. Disorder in industry and transport
had intensified, and difficulties in obtaining provisions had increased.
Gross industrial production in 1917 had decreased by over 36 percent
from what it had been in 1916. In the autumn, as much as 50 percent of
all enterprises were closed down in the Urals, the Donbas, and other
industrial centers, leading to mass unemployment. At the same time, the
cost of living increased sharply. The real wages of the workers fell
about 50 percent from what they had been in 1913. Russia's national debt
in October 1917 had risen to 50 billion rubles. Of this, debts to
foreign governments constituted more than 11 billion rubles. The country
faced the threat of financial bankruptcy.

In September and October 1917, there were strikes by the Moscow and
Petrograd workers, the miners of the Donbas, the metalworkers of the
Urals, the oil workers of Baku, the textile workers of the Central
Industrial Region, and the railroad workers on 44 different railway
lines. In these months alone more than a million workers took part in
mass strike action. Workers established control over production and
distribution in many factories and plants in a social revolution.

By October 1917 there had been over four thousand peasant uprisings
against landowners. When the Provisional Government sent out punitive
detachments it only enraged the peasants. The garrisons in Petrograd,
Moscow, and other cities, the Northern and Western fronts, and the
sailors of the Baltic Fleet in September openly declared through their
elected representative body Tsentrobalt that they did not recognize the
authority of the Provisional Government and would not carry out any of
its commands.

In a diplomatic note of the 1st May, the minister of foreign affairs,
Pavel Milyukov, expressed the Provisional Government's desire to carry
the war against the Central Powers through "to a victorious conclusion",
arousing broad indignation. On 1–4 May about 100,000 workers and
soldiers of Petrograd, and after them the workers and soldiers of other
cities, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "Down
with the war!" and "all power to the soviets!" The mass demonstrations
resulted in a crisis for the Provisional Government.

1 July saw more demonstrations, as about 500,000 workers and soldiers in
Petrograd demonstrated, again demanding "all power to the soviets",
"down with the war", and "down with the ten capitalist ministers". The
Provisional Government opened an offensive against the Central Powers on
1 July but it soon collapsed. The news of the offensive and its collapse
intensified the struggle of the workers and the soldiers. A new crisis
in the Provisional Government began on 15 July.

On 16 July spontaneous demonstrations of workers and soldiers began in
Petrograd, demanding that power be turned over to the soviets. The
Central Committee of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party provided
leadership to the spontaneous movements. On 17 July, over 500,000 people
participated in a peaceful demonstration in Petrograd, the so-called
July Days. The Provisional Government, with the support of the
Socialist-Revolutionary Party-Menshevik leaders of the All-Russian
Executive Committee of the Soviets, ordered an armed attack against the
demonstrators. Fifty-six people were killed and 650 were wounded.

A period of repression followed. On 5–6 July attacks were made on the
editorial offices and printing presses of *Pravda* and on the Palace of
Kshesinskaya, where the Central Committee and the Petrograd Committee of
the Bolsheviks were located. On 7 July a government decree ordering the
arrest and trial of Vladimir Lenin was published. He was forced to go
underground, just as he had been under the Tsarist regime. Bolsheviks
began to be arrested, workers were disarmed, and revolutionary military
units in Petrograd were disbanded or sent off to the front. On 12 July
the Provisional Government published a law introducing the death penalty
at the front. The formation of the second coalition government, with
Alexander Kerensky as chairman, was completed on 24 July.

Another problem for the government centered on General Lavr Kornilov,
who had been Commander-in-Chief since 18 July. In response to a
Bolshevik appeal, Moscow’s working class began a protest strike of
400,000 workers. The Moscow workers were supported by strikes and
protest rallies by workers in Kiev, Kharkov, Nizhny Novgorod,
Ekaterinburg, and other cities.

In what became known as the Kornilov Affair, Kornilov directed an army
under Aleksandr Krymov to march toward Petrograd with Kerensky's
agreement. Although the details remain sketchy, Kerensky appeared to
become frightened by the possibility of a coup and the order was
countermanded (by comparison, historian Richard Pipes has argued that
the whole episode was engineered by Kerensky himself). On 27 August,
feeling betrayed by the Kerensky government who had previously agreed
with his views on how to restore order to Russia, Kornilov pushed on
towards Petrograd. With few troops to spare on the front, Kerensky was
forced to turn to the Petrograd Soviet for help. Bolsheviks, Mensheviks
and Socialist Revolutionaries confronted the army and convinced them to
stand down. The damage was already done, however. Right-wingers felt
betrayed, and the left wing was resurgent.

With Kornilov defeated, the Bolsheviks' popularity with the soviets
significantly increased. During and after the defeat of Kornilov, a mass
turn of the soviets toward the Bolsheviks began, both in the central and
local areas. On 31 August, the Petrograd Soviet of Workers and Soldiers
Deputies, and on 5 September, the Moscow Soviet Workers Deputies adopted
the Bolshevik resolutions on the question of power. The Bolsheviks won a
majority in the Soviets of Briansk, Samara, Saratov, Tsaritsyn, Minsk,
Kiev, Tashkent, and other cities. In one day alone, 1 September, the
All-Russian Central Executive Committee of Soviets received demands from
126 local soviets urging it to take power into its own hands.

Events
------

Image:CruiserAurora061609.jpg|thumb|Cruiser *Aurora*.
Image:GunAurora061609.jpg|thumb|Forward gun of *Aurora* that fired the
signal shot. On, the Bolsheviks' Central Committee voted 10-2 for a
resolution saying that "an armed uprising is inevitable, and that the
time for it is fully ripe".

On, Bolshevik leader Jaan Anvelt led his leftist revolutionaries in an
uprising in Tallinn, the capital of the Autonomous Governorate of
Estonia. Two days later, Bolsheviks led their forces in the uprising in
Petrograd (modern day Saint Petersburg), the capital of Russia, against
the Kerensky Provisional Government. For the most part, the revolt in
Petrograd was bloodless, with the Red Guards led by Bolsheviks taking
over major government facilities with little opposition before finally
launching an assault on the poorly defended Winter Palace.

The official Soviet version of events follows: An assault led by
Vladimir Lenin was launched at 9:45 p.m. signaled by a blank shot from
the cruiser *Aurora*. (The *Aurora* was placed in Petrograd and still
stands there now.) The Winter Palace was guarded by Cossacks, cadets
(military students), and a Women's Battalion. It was taken at about
2 a.m. The earlier date was made the official date of the Revolution,
when all offices except the Winter Palace had been taken. More
contemporary research with access to government archives significantly
corrects accepted Soviet edited and embellished history. The archival
version shows that parties of Bolshevik operatives sent out from the
Smolny by Lenin took over all critical centers of power in Petrograd in
the early hours of the night without a shot being fired. In fact the
effectively unoccupied Winter Palace also was taken bloodlessly by a
small group which broke in, got lost in the cavernous interior, and
accidentally happened upon the remnants of Kerensky's provisional
government in the imperial family's breakfast room. The illiterate
revolutionaries then compelled those arrested to write up their own
arrest papers. The stories of the "defense of the Winter Palace" and the
heroic "Storming of the Winter Palace" came later as the creative
propaganda product of Bolshevik publicists. Grandiose paintings
depicting the "Women's Battalion" and photo stills taken from Sergei
Eisenstein's staged film depicting the "politically correct" version of
the October events in Petrograd came to be taken as truth.

Later official accounts of the revolution from the Soviet Union would
depict the events in October as being far more dramatic than they
actually had been. (See firsthand account by British General Knox.) This
was helped by the historical reenactment, entitled *The Storming of the
Winter Palace*, which was staged in 1920. This reenactment, watched by
100,000 spectators, provided the model for official films made much
later, which showed a huge storming of the Winter Palace and fierce
fighting (See Sergei Eisenstein's *October: Ten Days That Shook the
World*). In reality the Bolshevik insurgents faced little or no
opposition. The insurrection was timed and organized to hand state power
to the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers'
Deputies, which began on 25 October. After a single day of revolution
eighteen people had been arrested and two had been killed.

Timeline of the spread of Soviet power (Gregorian calendar dates)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

-   5 November 1917: Tallinn.
-   7 November 1917: Petrograd, Minsk, Novgorod, Ivanovo-Voznesensk and
    Tartu
-   8 November 1917: Ufa, Kazan, Yekaterinburg and Narva;(failed in
    Kiev)
-   9 November 1917: Vitebsk, Yaroslavl, Saratov, Samara and Izhevsk
-   10 November 1917: Rostov, Tver and Nizhny Novgorod
-   12 November 1917: Voronezh, Smolensk and Gomel
-   13 November 1917: Tambov
-   14 November 1917: Orel and Perm
-   15 November 1917: Pskov, Moscow and Baku
-   27 November 1917: Tsaritsyn
-   1 December 1917: Mogilev
-   8 December 1917: Vyatka
-   10 December 1917: Kishinev
-   11 December 1917: Kaluga
-   14 December 1917: Novorossisk
-   15 December 1917: Kostroma
-   20 December 1917: Tula
-   24 December 1917: Kharkov (invasion of Ukraine by the Muravyov Red
    Guard forces, establishment of the Soviet Ukraine and hostilities in
    the region)
-   29 December 1917: Sevastopol (invasion of Crimea by the Red Guard
    forces, establishment of the Taurida Soviet republic)
-   4 January 1918: Penza
-   11 January 1918: Yekaterinoslav
-   17 January 1918: Petrozavodsk
-   19 January 1918: Poltava
-   22 January 1918: Zhitomir
-   26 January 1918: Simferopol
-   27 January 1918: Nikolayev
-   28 January 1918: Helsinki (the Reds overthrow the White Senate, the
    Finnish Civil War begins)
-   29 January 1918: (failed again in Kiev)
-   31 January 1918: Odessa and Orenburg (establishment of the Odessa
    Soviet Republic)
-   7 February 1918: Astrakhan
-   8 February 1918: Kiev and Vologda (defeat of the Ukrainian
    government)
-   17 February 1918: Arkhangelsk
-   25 February 1918: Novocherkassk

Outcomes
--------

Image:Milrevkom proclamation.jpg|thumb|right|Petrograd Milrevcom
proclamation about the deposing of the Russian Provisional Government

The Second Congress of Soviets consisted of 670 elected delegates; 300
were Bolshevik and nearly a hundred were Left Socialist-Revolutionaries,
who also supported the overthrow of the Alexander Kerensky Government.
When the fall of the Winter Palace was announced, the Congress adopted a
decree transferring power to the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and
Peasants' Deputies, thus ratifying the Revolution.

The transfer of power was not without disagreement. The center and Right
wings of the Socialist Revolutionaries as well as the Mensheviks
believed that Lenin and the Bolsheviks had Coup d'état|illegally seized
power and they walked out before the resolution was passed. As they
exited, they were taunted by Leon Trotsky who told them "You are pitiful
isolated individuals; you are bankrupts; your role is played out. Go
where you belong from now on — into the dustbin of history!"

The following day, the Congress elected a Council of People's Commissars
(Sovnarkom) as the basis of a new Soviet Government, pending the
convocation of a Constituent Assembly, and passed the Decree on Peace
and the Decree on Land. This new government was also officially called
"provisional" until the Assembly was dissolved.

The Council of People's Commissars now began to arrest the leaders of
opposition parties. Dozens of Constitutional Democratic Party (Kadet)
leaders and members of the Constituent Assembly were imprisoned in The
Peter and Paul Fortress. These were to be followed by the arrests of
Socialist-Revolutionary Party and Menshevik leaders. On 20 December 1917
the Cheka was created by the decree of Vladimir Lenin. These were the
beginnings of the Bolshevik's consolidation of power over their
political opponents.

The Decree on Land ratified the actions of the peasants who throughout
Russia seized private land and redistributed it among themselves. The
Bolsheviks viewed themselves as representing an alliance of workers and
peasants and memorialized that understanding with the Hammer and Sickle
on the flag and coat of arms of the Soviet Union.

Other decrees:

-   All Russian banks were nationalized.
-   Private bank accounts were confiscated.
-   The Church's properties (including bank accounts) were seized.
-   All foreign debts were repudiated.
-   Control of the factories was given to the soviets.
-   Wages were fixed at higher rates than during the war, and a shorter,
    eight-hour working day was introduced.

Bolshevik-led attempts to seize power in other parts of the Russian
Empire were largely successful in Russia proper — although the fighting
in Moscow lasted for two weeks — but they were less successful in
ethnically non-Russian parts of the Empire, which had been clamoring for
independence since the February Revolution. For example, the Ukrainian
Rada, which had declared autonomy on 23 June 1917, created the Ukrainian
People's Republic on 20 November, which was supported by the Ukrainian
Congress of Soviets. This led to an armed conflict with the Bolshevik
government in Petrograd and, eventually, a Ukrainian declaration of
independence from Russia on 25 January 1918. In Estonia, two rival
governments emerged: the Estonian Provincial Assembly proclaimed itself
the supreme legal authority of Estonia on 28 November 1917 and issued
the Declaration of Independence on 24 February 1918, while an Estonian
Bolshevik sympathizer, Jaan Anvelt, was recognized by Lenin's government
as Estonia's leader on 8 December, although forces loyal to Anvelt
controlled only the capital.

The success of the October Revolution transformed the Russian state from
parliamentarian to socialist in character. A coalition of anti-Bolshevik
groups attempted to unseat the new government in the Russian Civil War
from 1918 to 1922.

In an attempt to intervene in the civil war after the Bolshevik's
separate peace with the Central Powers, the Allied powers (United
Kingdom, France, United States and Japan) occupied parts of the Soviet
Union for over two years before finally withdrawing . The United States
did not recognize the new Russian government until 1933. The European
powers recognized the Soviet Union in the early 1920s and began to
engage in business with it after the New Economic Policy (NEP) was
implemented.

Historiography
--------------

Few events in historical research have been as conditioned by political
influences as the October Revolution. The historiography of the
Revolution generally divides into three camps: the Soviet-Marxist view,
the Western-Totalitarian view, and the Revisionist view.

### Soviet historiography

Soviet historiography of the October Revolution is intertwined with
Soviet historical development. Many of the initial Soviet interpreters
of the Revolution were themselves Bolshevik revolutionaries. (For
example, the revolutionary Leon Trotsky wrote a major narrative of the
October Revolution.) After the initial wave of revolutionary narratives,
Soviet historians worked within “narrow guidelines” defined by the
Soviet government. The rigidity of interpretive possibilities reached
its height under Joseph Stalin.

Soviet historians of the October Revolution interpreted the Revolution
so as to establish the legitimacy of Marxist ideology, and also the
Bolshevik regime. To establish the accuracy of Marxist ideology, Soviet
historians generally described the Revolution as the product of class
struggle. They maintained that the Revolution was the supreme event in a
world history governed by historical laws. The Bolshevik Party is placed
at the center of the Revolution, exposing the errors of both the
moderate Provisional Government and the spurious “socialist” Mensheviks
in the Petrograd Soviet. Guided by Vladimir Lenin's leadership and his
firm grasp of scientific Marxist theory, the Party led the “logically
predetermined” events of the October Revolution from beginning to end.
The events were, according to these historians, logically predetermined
because of the socio-economic development of Russia, where the monopoly
industrial capitalism alienated the masses. In this view, the Bolshevik
party took the leading role in organizing these alienated industrial
workers, and thereby established the construction of the first socialist
state.

Although Soviet historiography of the October Revolution stayed
relatively constant until 1991, it did undergo some changes. Following
Stalin’s death, historians such as E. N. Burdzhalov and P. V. Volobuev
published historical research that deviated significantly from the party
line in refining the doctrine that the Bolshevik victory “was
predetermined by the state of Russia’s socio-economic development”.
These historians, who comprised the “New Directions Group”, posited that
the complex nature of the October Revolution “could only be explained by
a multi-causal analysis, not by recourse to the mono-causality of
monopoly capitalism”. For them, the central actor is still the Bolshevik
party, but this party triumphed “because it alone could solve the
preponderance of ‘general democratic’ tasks the country faced” (such as
the struggle for peace, the exploitation of landlords, and so on.)

During the late Soviet period, the opening of select Soviet archives
during glasnost sparked innovative research that broke away from some
aspects of Marxism-Leninism, though the key features of the orthodox
Soviet view remained intact.

### Western historiography

During the Cold War, Western historiography of the October Revolution
developed in direct response to the assertions of the Soviet view. The
Soviet Marxist-Leninist version of the October Revolution conditioned
historical interpretations in the United States and the West. As a
result, these Western historians exposed what they considered flaws in
the Soviet view, thereby undermining the Bolshevik’s original
legitimacy, as well as the precepts of Marxism.

Far from being inevitable according the historical laws of Marxism,
these Western historians presented the revolution as the result of a
chain of contingent accidents. Examples of these accidental and
contingent factors that precipitated the Revolution include World
War I's timing, chance, and the poor leadership of Tsar Nicholas II as
well as liberal and moderate socialists. According to this historical
interpretation, it was not popular support, but rather Bolshevik
manipulation of the masses and the organization’s ruthlessness and
superior structure which enabled it to survive. For these historians,
the Bolsheviks’ defeat in the Constituent Assembly elections of
November–December 1917 demonstrated popular opposition to the
Bolsheviks’ coup, as did the scale and breadth of the Civil War.

These historians saw the organization of the Bolshevik party as
proto-totalitarian. Their interpretation of the October Revolution as a
violent coup organized by a proto-totalitarian party reinforced the idea
that totalitarianism is an inherent part of Soviet history. For them,
Stalinist totalitarianism developed as a natural progression from
Leninism and the Bolshevik party’s tactics and organization.

### Impact of the dissolution of the USSR on historical research

The dissolution of the USSR had an impact on historical interpretations
of the October Revolution. Since 1991, increasing access to large
amounts of Soviet archival materials made it possible to re‑examine the
October Revolution. Though both Western and Russian historians now have
access to many of these archives, the impact of the dissolution of the
USSR can be seen most clearly in the work of historians in the former
USSR. While the disintegration essentially helped solidify the Western
and Revisionist views, post-USSR Russian historians largely repudiated
the former Soviet historical interpretation of the Revolution. In other
words, the established Soviet view of the October Revolution has been
challenged, and consequently “Russian historians’ outlook has come
closer to that of their Western conferes.” As Stephen Kotkin argues,
1991 prompted “a return to political history and the apparent
resurrection of totalitarianism, the interpretive view that, in
different ways…revisionists sought to bury”. In other words, after 1991,
there has been the revival among some historians of the “continuity
thesis”, the idea that there was an uncomplicated, natural evolution
from the October Revolution’s organizational structure to Stalin’s
Gulags.

Legacy
------

The term "Red October" (Красный Октябрь, Krasnyy Oktyabr) has also been
used to describe the events of the month. This name has in turn been
lent to a steel factory made notable by the Battle of Stalingrad, a
Moscow sweets factory that is well known in Russia, and a fictional
Soviet submarine.

Sergei Eisenstein's film *October: Ten Days That Shook the World*
describes and glorifies the revolution and was commissioned to
commemorate the event.

7 November, the anniversary of the October Revolution, was the official
national day of the Soviet Union from 1918 onward and still is a public
holiday in Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, and the breakaway territory of
Transnistria.

The October revolution of 1917 also marks the inception of the first
communist government in Russia, and thus the first large-scale socialist
state in world history. After this Russia became the Russian SFSR and
later part of the USSR, which dissolved in late 1991.
