**Rail transport in Russia** has been called an economic wonder of the
19th, 20th, and 21st century. In length of track Russian railroads are
second globally to the railways of the United States. In volume of
freight hauled, they are third behind the United States and China, using
the standard measure of ton-kilometers. In overall density of operations
(here the standard measure is (freight ton-kilometers +
passenger-kilometers)/length of track)) Russia is second only to China.

Characteristics of the Russian rail transport system
----------------------------------------------------

Russia is, geographically, a much larger country than either the United
States or China, so its rail density (rail track/country area) is lower
than that of these other two – much lower in the case of the United
States. Since Russia's population density is also much lower than that
of these other two (excluding Alaska from the U.S. measure in this
case), the Russian railways carry their freight and passengers over very
long distances, often through vast, nearly empty spaces; their average
length of haul is second in the world, behind only the United States and
essentially tied with Canada. Coal and coke make up almost one-third of
the freight traffic and have average hauls of around 1500 kilometers,
while ferrous metals make up another 10 percent of freight traffic and
travel an average of over 1900 kilometers. Many remote shippers and
customers have access either to only very poor alternative shipping
options by road or water, and/or access to those alternative options for
less than the entire year.

Though like most railways RZhD carries both freight and passengers, it
is one of the most freight-dominant railways in the world, behind only
Canada, the United States, and Estonia in the ratio of freight
ton-kilometers to passenger-kilometers. However per head of population
intercity passenger travel is far greater than the United States (which
has the lowest long distance passenger train usages in developed world).
Measured by the share of freight carried, RZhD is second to none among
the world's largest railways in its importance to its country's economy.

Structure
---------

The Russian railways are divided into seventeen regional railways, from
the October Railway serving the St. Petersburg region to the Far Eastern
Railway serving Vladivostok, with the free-standing Kaliningrad and
Sakhalin Railways on either end. However, the regional railways are
closely coordinated by the central authority – the Ministry of the Means
of Communication, MPS, until 2003, and the Joint Stock Company Russian
Railways, Rossiiskie Zheleznyie Dorogi or RZhD, since then – including
the pooling and redistribution of revenues. This has been crucial to two
long-standing policies of cross-subsidization: to passenger operations
from freight revenues, and to coal shipments from other freight.

Brief history
-------------

The Russian railways were a collection of mostly privately owned and
operated companies during most of the 19th century, though many had been
constructed with heavy government involvement and financing. The tsarist
government began mobilizing and nationalizing the rail system as World
War I approached, and the new communist government finished the
nationalization process. With the dissolution of the USSR in 1991, the
Russian Federation was left with three-fifths of the railway track of
the Union as well as nine-tenths of the highway mileage – though only
two-fifths of the port capacity.

In this century, substantial changes in the Russian railways have been
discussed and implemented in the context of two government reform
documents: Decree No. 384 of 18 May 2001 of the Government of the
Russian Federation, "A Program for Structural Reform of Railway
Transport", and Order No. 877 of 17 June 2008 of the Government of the
Russian Federation, "The Strategy for Railway Development in the Russian
Federation to 2030". The former focused on restructuring the railways
from government-owned monopoly to competitive sector; the latter focused
on ambitious plans for equipment modernization and network expansion.

Statistics, current
-------------------

Russian Railways accounts for 2.5% of Russia's GDP. The percentage of
freight and passenger traffic that goes by rail is unknown, since no
statistics are available for private transportation such as private
automobiles or company-owned trucks. In 2007, about 1.3 billion
passengers and 1.3 billion tons of freight went via Russian Railways. In
2007 the company owned 19,700 goods and passenger locomotives, 24,200
passenger cars (carriages) (2007) and 526,900 freight cars (goods
wagons) (2007). A further 270,000 freight cars in Russia are privately
owned (needs source).

In 2009 Russia had 128,000 kilometers of common-carrier railroad line,
of which about half is electrified and carries most of the traffic, over
40% was double track or better.

Industrial railroads
--------------------

Besides the common-carrier railroads that are well covered by government
statistics there are many industrial railways (such as mining or
lumbering railroads) whose statistics are covered separately, and which
in 1981 had a total length almost equal to the length of the common
carrier railroads. Currently (2008) they are only about half the length
of the common-carrier system. In 1980, about two-thirds of their freight
flowed to and from the common-carrier railroads while the remaining
third was internal transport only on an industrial railroad. (For
example, a lumber company uses its private industrial railroad to
transport logs from a forest to its sawmill.) About 4% of the industrial
railroad traffic was on track jointly "owned" by two companies.

Narrow gauge railways
---------------------

In 1981, there was 33.4 thousand kilometers of narrow gauge.

-   Sakhalin Railway - located in the Sakhalin, gauge of 1067mm
-   Apsheronsk narrow-gauge railway - located in the Krasnodar Krai,
    gauge of 750mm
-   Kudemskaya narrow-gauge railway - located in the Arkhangelsk Oblast,
    Severodvinsk, gauge of 750mm
-   Alapayevsk narrow-gauge railway - located in the Sverdlovsk Oblast,
    Alapayevsk, gauge of 750mm
-   Altsevo peat narrow gauge railway - located in Nizhny Novgorod
    Oblast, gauge of 750mm
-   Kerzhenets peat narrow gauge railway - located in Nizhny Novgorod
    Oblast, gauge of 750mm
-   Pishchalskoye peat narrow gauge railway - located in Kirov Oblast,
    gauge of 750mm
-   Gorokhovskoe peat narrow gauge railway - located in Kirov Oblast,
    gauge of 750mm
-   Narrow gauge railway of Decor-1 factory - located in the Arzamassky
    District, gauge of 750mm
-   Narrow gauge railway of KSM-2 factory - located in the Tver, gauge
    of 750mm

Hardware overview
-----------------

Russian railways were modernized mostly during the Soviet period and
achieved world class hardware status.

### Couplers

The SA3 coupler (Soviet Automatic coupler, model 3) used in Russia is
more advanced than the Janney coupler used in the United States.
Advantages of the Russian SA3 include: 1. It is always ready to couple,
unlike the Janney coupler which requires that at least one of the
couplers has its knuckle open. 2. It has greater gathering range.

While the Russians may have the best designed coupler in the world,
there were problems with it breaking due to making it with lower quality
steel, low quality of maintenance/repairs/rebuilding, and coupling cars
at speeds higher than allowed by the rules. The quality of steel was
improved but other problems remained.

### Track gauge

Railway Universities
--------------------

Railway universities prepare students for careers in various aspects of
railroading. They were formerly known as: "railway colleges". During the
Soviet period they were often known as "higher educational institutes"
(for railroads) оr вуз, (an acronym ), and this designation is still in
use. In 1967 (Soviet period) they had a total of 215,000 students
enrolled, about half of which were correspondence students. However,
less than 7000 students graduated each year, mostly in engineering (such
as electrical, mechanical, or civil engineering with emphasis on
railroad applications).

Today (2010), about 20 years after the demise of the Soviet Union that
founded many of these colleges, railway universities are still quite
active. Two major railway universities in 2010 are in St. Petersburg and
Moscow:

-   Petersburg Government University of Railways [official
    site](http://www.pgups.ru/) (a little in English)
-   Moscow State University of Railway Engineering (MIIT) [official
    site](http://miit.ru/portal/page/portal/miit/) (a little in English)
    [Euro Commission info.](http://www.mundus-multic.org/partner2/MIIT)

The Moscow "University claims to be the 5th largest university in the
world in terms of the number of students (about 60,000).

`This excludes correspondence students but might include students in the over 40 branches of the university in other cities and also might include students in the "technikum" (which is something like an advanced trade school) that merged into the university. However only "17,000 undergraduate and postgraduate students" are claimed on the English part of the official university website:`

Other Railway Universities in Russia (with more precisely translated
names like "Samara Government University of Railways") in 2010 are:
(Note that "wiki" refers to the Russian Wikipedia [in Russian])

-   
    :   ru: Самарский государственный университет путей сообщения|Samara
        Railway University (wiki) [official site](http://www.samiit.ru/)
        located in Samara

-   
    :   ru: Омский государственный университет путей сообщения|Omsk
        State Transportation University (wiki) [official
        site](http://www.omgups.ru/)[Info in
        English](http://www.mundus-multic.org/partner2/Omsk) located in
        Omsk

-   
    :   ru: Ростовский государственный университет путей
        сообщения|Rostov Railway University (wiki) [official
        site](http://www.rgups.ru/) located in Rostov-on-Don

-   
    :   ru: Дальневосточный государственный университет путей
        сообщения|Far East Railway University (wiki) [official
        site](http://festu.khv.ru/) [1](http://en.dvgups.ru/) located in
        Khabarovsk

-   
    :   ru: Иркутский государственный университет путей
        сообщения|Irkutsk Railway University (wiki) [official
        site](http://www.iriit.irk.ru/) located in Irkutsk

-   
    :   ru: Сибирский государственный университет путей
        сообщения|Siberian Railway University (wiki) [official
        site](http://www.stu.ru/) located in Novosibirsk

-   Ural State University of Railway Transport [official
    site](http://www.usurt.ru/) located in Sverdlovsk
-   
    :   ru: Российская открытая академия транспорта|Russian Open Academy
        of Transportation (wiki) [official site](http://www.rgotups.ru/)
        headquarters in Moscow

(The "Open Academy" is a correspondence school and is part of the Moscow
Railway University: MIIT).

The above universities often have branches in other cities. Railway
trade schools "technikumi" may have been taken in under the university
umbrella. The above websites often include pictures of campuses,
students, etc. For full access to the websites (which includes class
assignments, etc.) one usually needs an account (including password)
which only the students, etc. may obtain. Russians today seem to be
highly motivated to obtain a college education, even if the job
prospects are not very good. It was thought by some that under
capitalism, there would not be the surplus of college graduates that
existed in the USSR. But it turns out that there is an even greater
surplus today.

Command & control system
------------------------

Since 2010 the company had started an overhaul of its computer systems.
The overhaul will centralize the management of data into new computing
hubs, restructure the collection of information on the railroad's field
operations, and integrate new automation software to help the railway
strategize how to deploy its assets. The geriatric machines that the new
mainframes will replace include Soviet-built clones of IBM's Cold
War–era computers, called ES EVM (the transliterated Russian acronym for
"unified system of electronic computing machines").

Foreign activities
------------------

The RZD operates the Armenian Railway until 2038. During this period, at
least 570 million euro will be invested, 90% going into infrastructure.

Joint ventures have been formed to build and operate a port in Rasŏn in
North Korea, and rail links connecting that port to the Russian rail
network at the North Korean-Russian border Khasan-Tumangang.

Trans-Eurasia Logistics is a joint venture with RZD that operates
container freight trains between Germany and China via Russia

Rail links with adjacent countries
----------------------------------

Voltage of electrification systems not necessarily compatible.

-   Same gauge:
    -   Finland, the difference to 1524mm is so small that the same
        rolling stock can be used
    -   Estonia, same approximate gauge as Finland
    -   Latvia
    -   Lithuania – only from the Kaliningrad Oblast enclave
    -   Belarusskaja Železnaja Doroga|Belarus
    -   Ukraine
    -   Georgia – currently, only connects with the breakaway Republic
        of Abkhazia; the line beyond, to Georgia proper, is closed for
        political reasons.
    -   Azerbaijan
    -   Kazakhstan
    -   Mongolia
-   Break-of-gauge:
    -   China, break-of-gauge 1520mm to 1435mm
    -   North Korea, break-of-gauge 1520mm to 1435mm
    -   Poland – only from the Kaliningrad Oblast enclave -
        break-of-gauge 1520mm to 1435mm
        -   Note that break-of-gauge between Poland and Belarus near
            Brest are in use of Russian Railways mostly

