**Renewable energy in Russia** mainly consists of hydroelectric energy.
The country is the fifth largest producer of renewable energy in the
world, although it is 56th when hydroelectric energy is not taken into
account. Some 179 TWh of Russia's energy production comes from renewable
energy sources, out of a total economically feasible potential of
1823 TWh. 16% of Russia's electricity is generated from hydropower, and
less than 1% is generated from all other renewable energy sources
combined. Roughly 68% of Russia's electricity is generated from thermal
power and 16% from nuclear power.

While most of the large hydropower plants in Russia date from the Soviet
era, the abundance of fossil fuels in the Soviet Union and the Russian
Federation has resulted in little need for the development of other
renewable energy sources. There are currently plans to develop all types
of renewable energy, which is strongly encouraged by the Russian
government. Russian President Dmitry Medvedev has called for renewable
energy to have a larger share of Russia's energy output, and has taken
steps to promote the development of renewable energy in Russia since
2008.

History
-------

Most sources of renewable energy are new to Russia and have experienced
development in recent years. However, hydroelectric power has a long
history in Russia, dating back to the Soviet era. The rapid expansion of
hydroelectric power in the Soviet Union began in 1930, when the total
installed capacity equaled 600 MWh. The Soviet Union built its first
windmill in 1941, which had a capacity of 100 kW. By the time the Soviet
Union collapsed in 1990, it had a total installed capacity of . The
largest dams that Russia currently has, including the
Sayano–Shushenskaya Dam, were built in the 1950s and 1960s. From the
1970s to 2000, the Soviet Union and Russia focused mainly on
"traditional" power sources: thermal-, hydro- and nuclear power.
However, in 1986, the Soviet government announced new energy goals,
which included further hydroelectric plant construction as well as the
start of small-scale solar and wind use for electricity production.
Overall, Soviet energy policy focused on nuclear and thermal power,
although renewable energy was not completely neglected. The dissolution
of the Soviet Union prevented those goals from being fulfilled.

The construction of the large dams prominent in Soviet times largely
ended in the 1990s with the creation of the Russian Federation. In
addition, due to the post-Soviet recession, much of the country's
infrastructure, including dams, fell into disrepair. Use of oil and gas
for energy took priority in Russia and renewable energy was ignored.
This policy lasted until 2008, when Medvedev announced reforms to
Russia's energy policies in an attempt to focus more on renewable
energy. Since then, there has been rapid development of new renewable
energy sources.

Current status
--------------

Russia is one of the world's largest producers of energy, most of which
it obtains from oil, natural gas and coal. The country's focus on those
resources for production and export, which constitute 80% of foreign
trade earnings, means it has paid little attention to renewable energy.
Out of the 203 GW of electric generation capacity that Russia has, 44 GW
comes from hydroelectricity, 307 MW from geothermal, 15 MW from wind and
negligible amounts from other renewable sources. In 2009, the Russian
energy industry generated a total 992 TWh of electricity, 176 TWh of
which was produced by hydroelectric power stations. Some of Russia's
hydroelectric power plants are outdated and are in need of additional
investment, as shown by the accident at the Sayano-Shushenskaya HPP in
2009.

President Dmitry Medvedev announced in May 2010 that the Russian
government would strongly consider purchasing electricity generated from
renewable energy sources in an attempt to encourage development of
renewable energy. The government has plans for 4.5% of Russia's energy
output to come from non-hydroelectric renewable energy sources.
Additionally, in November 2010, the government approved a
US\$300 billion program to make factories and buildings more energy
efficient; it also announced plans to construct eight energy-efficient
lamp production plants, promote recycling and support the construction
of a hybrid car plant. Medvedev announced in late 2009 that he wanted to
cut Russian energy consumption by 40% by 2020. At the moment,
development is slowed by low investment, economic instability, low
public demand and low tariffs on heat and electricity. Subsidies for
natural gas are another obstacle to renewable energy development.

Hydropower
----------

Hydropower is the most used form of renewable energy in Russia, and
there is large potential in Russia for more use of hydropower. Russia
has 102 hydropower plants with capacities of over 100 MW, making it
fifth in the world for hydropower production. It is also second in the
world for hydro potential, yet only 20% of this potential is developed.
Russia is home to 9% of the world's hydro resources, mostly in Siberia
and the country's far east. At the end of 2005, the generating capacity
from hydroelectric sources in Russia was 45,700 MW, and an additional
5,648 MW was under construction. The World Energy Council believes that
Russia has much potential for using its hydro resources, with a
theoretical potential of about 2,295 TWh/yr, with 852 TWh being
economically feasible.

The largest dams in Russia are the Sayano-Shushenskaya Dam, which has an
installed capacity of 6,400 MW; the Krasnoyarsk Dam (6,000 MW); the
Bratsk Dam (4,500 MW); the Ust-Ilimsk Dam (4,320 MW) and the Zeya Dam
(1,330 MW). Some of the most recent dam projects are the Bureya Dam
(2010 MW) and the Irganai Dam (800 MW). The Boguchany Dam (1920 MW),
Zelenchuk Dam (320 MW), Zaramag Dam (352 MW) and Nizhne-Chereksky
(60 MW) are currently under construction. RusHydro is the largest
hydroelectric company in Russia and the second largest hydroelectric
producer in the world. In October 2010, China Yangtze Power, the largest
hydropower corporation in China, and EuroSibEnergo, a Russian energy
company, signed a cooperation agreement to expand hydroelectric energy
production in Russia and export energy to China's northern territories.
The West Siberian Generating Company has plans to start construction of
eight mini-hydroelectric power plants in the Altai region before 2015.

On 17 August 2009, there was an explosion at the Sayano-Shushenskaya
hydroelectric power plant, which killed 75 plant workers and injured 13.
The Federal Service for Ecological, Technological, and Nuclear
Supervision's investigation concluded that poor management and technical
flaws were responsible. The explosion was caused by a 29-year-old
turbine that experienced an uncontrolled and excessive vibration. Since
then, officials from RusHydro, the operator of the plant, have called
for better oversight and safety at hydroelectric plants.

Geothermal energy
-----------------

Geothermal energy is the second most used form of renewable energy in
Russia but represents less than 1% of the total energy production. The
first geothermal power plant in Russia was built at Pauzhetka,
Kamchatka, in 1966, with a capacity of 5 MW. The total geothermal
installed capacity in 2005 was 79 MW, with 50 MW coming from a plant at
Verkhne-Mutnovsky. Russia is currently developing a 100 MW plant at
Mutnovsky and a 50 MW plant in Kaliningrad. Most geothermal resources
are currently used for heating settlements in the North Caucasus and
Kamchatka. Half of the geothermal production is used to heat homes and
industrial buildings, one third is used to heat greenhouses and 13% is
used for industrial processes.

In October 2010, Sergei Shmatko, Russia's energy minister, stated that
Russia and Iceland would work together to develop Kamchatka's geothermal
energy sources. Russia is also investigating foreign investment
possibilities for developing geothermal energy in the Kuril Islands.

Solar energy
------------

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
  <timeline> ImageSize = width:420 height:240 PlotArea = width:350 height:150 left:40 bottom:40 AlignBars = late        image:EU-Glob opta presentation.png|thumb|Solar insolation in Europe
                                                                                                                        
  DateFormat = x.y Period = from:0 till:5 TimeAxis = orientation:vertical ScaleMajor = unit:month increment:1 start:0   
                                                                                                                        
  TextData =                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                        
  ` pos:(15,220) textcolor:black fontsize:S`\                                                                           
  ` text:hrs`\                                                                                                          
  ` pos:(205,25) textcolor:black fontsize:S`\                                                                           
  ` text:Month`\                                                                                                        
  ` pos:(90,225) textcolor:black fontsize:M`\                                                                           
  ` text:Moscow Sun Hours/day (Avg = 2.98 hrs/day)`                                                                     
                                                                                                                        
  Colors =                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                        
  ` id:yellow value:yellow`                                                                                             
                                                                                                                        
  PlotData=                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                        
  `width:20 textcolor:black`\                                                                                           
  `bar:Jan color:yellow from:0 till:0.88 text:0.88 shift:(-10,20)`\                                                     
  `bar:Feb color:yellow from:0 till:2.32 text:2.32 shift:(-10,40)`\                                                     
  `bar:Mar color:yellow from:0 till:3.46 text:3.46 shift:(-10,60)`\                                                     
  `bar:Apr color:yellow from:0 till:3.80 text:3.80 shift:(-10,65)`\                                                     
  `bar:May color:yellow from:0 till:4.93 text:4.93 shift:(-10,80)`\                                                     
  `bar:Jun color:yellow from:0 till:4.97 text:4.97 shift:(-10,80)`\                                                     
  `bar:Jul color:yellow from:0 till:4.87 text:4.87 shift:(-10,80)`\                                                     
  `bar:Aug color:yellow from:0 till:4.29 text:4.29 shift:(-10,70)`\                                                     
  `bar:Sep color:yellow from:0 till:2.72 text:2.72 shift:(-10,45)`\                                                     
  `bar:Oct color:yellow from:0 till:1.74 text:1.74 shift:(-10,30)`\                                                     
  `bar:Nov color:yellow from:0 till:1.03 text:1.03 shift:(-10,20)`\                                                     
  `bar:Dec color:yellow from:0 till:0.71 text:0.71 shift:(-10,15)`                                                      
                                                                                                                        
  </timeline> Source: NREL                                                                                              
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Solar energy is virtually nonexistent in Russia, despite its large
potential in the country. The first Russian solar plant was opened in
Belgorod Oblast in November 2010. Russia has a total theoretical
potential of 2,213 TWh/yr for solar energy, with an economically
feasible amount of 101 TWh. The southern parts of Russia, especially the
North Caucasus, have the greatest potential for solar energy. Russia
plans to set up an overall solar capacity of 150 MW by 2020.

Plans for the construction of a new solar plant on the Black Sea have
been announced and the plant is expected to begin operations by 2012.
This plant, which will have a capacity of 12.3 MW, is being built by
Rusnano and Renova. Solar Wind LLC and Rusnano are building a plant that
will produce double-sided solar panels, which will be able to collect
solar energy from both sides. Construction is expected to finish in
early 2011 and the plant will have an annual manufacturing capacity of
30 MW. Nitol Solar is the largest Russian company in the area of
scientific development and manufacture of products used to generate
solar energy. Russia and India are currently discussing the possibility
of a joint venture to produce silicon wafers for the creation of
photovoltaic cells.

Wind energy
-----------

Russia has a long history of small-scale wind energy use but has never
developed large-scale commercial wind energy production. Most of its
current wind production is located in agricultural areas with low
population densities where connection to the main energy grid is
difficult. Russia is estimated to have a total potential of 80,000
TWh/yr for wind energy, 6,218 TWh/yr of which is economically feasible.
Most of this potential is found in the southern steppes and the
seacoasts of Russia, although in many of these areas the population
density is less than . This low population density means that there is
little existing electricity infrastructure currently in place, which
hinders development of these resources. In 2006, Russia had a total
installed wind capacity of 15 MW. Current Russian wind energy projects
have a combined capacity of over 1,700 MW. The Russian Wind Energy
Association predicts that if Russia achieves its goal of having 4.5% of
its energy come from renewable sources by 2020, the country will have a
total wind capacity of 7 GW.

In 2010, plans for the construction of a wind power plant in Yeisk, on
the Sea of Azov, were announced. It is expected to initially have a
capacity of 50 MW, which will become 100 MW a year later. German
engineering company Siemens announced in July 2010, following a visit to
Russia by Chancellor Angela Merkel, that it would build wind power
plants in Russia. By 2015, the company hopes to install 1,250 MW of
capacity in Russia.

Tidal energy
------------

Russia has many tidal energy resources at its disposal, although they
are currently underdeveloped as well. The Kola Bay and Sea of Okhotsk
alone could produce 100 GW with tidal power stations, and the national
energy potential from tidal energy can compete with current total energy
production. The currently active Kislaya Guba Tidal Power Station is the
largest tidal power facility in Russia and has the fourth largest
capacity (1.7 MW) among the world's tidal power plants.

Plans for constructing an 800 MW tidal power plant in the Barents Sea
were announced in 2008. Possible long-term projects include the Penzhin
Tidal Power Plant, which could become the largest power station in the
world, with an installed capacity of up to 87 GW and an annual
production of 200 TWh.

Biofuel
-------

Russia's biofuel industry is new, but it has been developing rapidly in
recent years. Russia is one of the largest grain producers, has a
well-developed ethyl alcohol industry and has increasing rapeseed (often
used to create biodiesel) production rates. The Russian government
declared in 2008 that it would play an active role in developing the
biofuel industry by building 30 new biofuel plants and providing tax
breaks and subsidized interest rates to biofuel energy projects.
Although these plans were delayed, on 13 September 2010, Medvedev
announced that construction would begin in early 2011. Biobutanol, the
biofuel produced by these plants, would be produced from timber
by-products, such as woodchips and sawdust.

Lada, a Russian car manufacturer, produced its first biofuel-powered
automobile in November 2010. Deputy Transportation Minister Valery
Okulov stated that Russian companies are currently developing
helicopters that run on biofuel. Russia hopes to export biofuel to the
European Union; the country's Biotechnology Corporation estimates that
Russia is capable of exporting of biofuel annually.

Biomass
-------

Biomass is already used in some parts of Russia to provide a total of
1%, or 9 Twh/year, of Russia's total energy. However, due to Russia's
vast forest and peat reserves, it has a total biomass technical
potential of 431 Twh/year, of which 285 Twh/year is economically
feasible. Most of this potential is found in northwestern Russia, which
has a developed pulp and paper industry that can provide wood-based
waste to use as biomass energy.

Use of peat for energy production was prominent during the Soviet Union,
with the peak occurring in 1965 and declining from that point. In 1929,
over 40% of the Soviet Union's electric energy came from peat, which
dropped to 1% by 1980. Currently, Russia is responsible for 17% of the
world's peat production, and 20% of the peat that it produces,, is used
for energy purposes. Shatura Power Station in Moscow Oblast and Kirov
Power Station in Kirov Oblast are the two largest peat power stations in
the world.

See also
--------

-   Energy policy of Russia
-   Nuclear power in Russia

Notes
-----

References
----------

Category:Renewable energy in Russia|
