**Rossiyane** (plural, ), **Rossiyanin** (masculine, ), **Rossiyanka**
(feminine, ) is a demonym for Russia, that widely used for all citizens
of Russia, regardless of ethnicity. Rossiyane are the people, who live
in Russia and the people who are identified with the country of Russia -
residential, legal, historical or cultural. The term includes all
inhabitants of Russia, who are native for Russia's territory (Russians,
Tatars, Ukrainians, Bashkirs, Chuvash people, Chechens, etc.) and who
are not native (for example, Afro-Russians, - *Afro-**Rossiyane***).
Those who have received Russian citizenship will also be called
Rossiyane, regardless of ethnicity and mother tongue (for example,
Gérard Depardieu or Viktor Ahn).

The word Rossiyane is derived from the word Rossiya (Russia). Its
derivation is similar to derivation Britain → British, Canada →
Canadians, Switzerland → Swiss people, United States of America →
Americans, Australia → Australians, India → Indians, Soviet Union →
Soviet people, China → Chinese Nation, Yugoslavia → Yugoslavs (it
doesn't refer to ethnicity). The term Rossiyane doesn't have
corresponding English word, but it is in German ( instead of ethnic term
), Swedish ( instead of ), Kazakh ( instead of ), etc.

Rossiyane (Russians) have a common history, share a common
Russia-related culture and speak the Russian language (because it is the
state language throughout Russia). The word Rossiyane refers to all
people holding citizenship of Russia, regardless of their ethnicity, and
does not include ethnic Russians living outside of Russia, but include
all non-Russians living in Russia. The word Rossiyane is used much more
often than *Russkie* (ethnic Russians) - on television, in politics, in
official documents and scientific papers (the word Russkie is only used
when talking about ethnicity).

The Tsardom of Russia became a multinational state in the 16th century.
The word Rossiyane was coined by Mikhail Lomonosov in the 18th century.
The word has been widely used since then. After the fall of the Russian
Empire, the expression "Soviet people" was used for the population of
the Soviet Union, regardless of ethnicity. After the dissolution of the
USSR, the word Rossiyane became widely used again. Modern Russia has
over 160 different ethnic groups within the Russian Federation's
borders. The word Rossiyane was often used by the first Russian
President Boris Yeltsin in his addresses to the Russian people. Vladimir
Putin often uses the words "multinational people of Russia". Russian
nationalism|Russian [ethnic] nationalists often criticise the term
Rossiyane.

The Constitution of Russia uses the expression "We, the multinational
people of the Russian Federation". Russian citizens can declare any
ethnicity on a voluntary basis (real ethnicity as well as not real,
including "Jedi", "gnomes", "goblins", "elves", "hobbits", "Martians",
"Scythians", "Babylonians", "Romans", "Incas" - according to the 2002
Russian Census official statistics). The Constitution of Russia stated
"Everyone shall have the right to determine and declare his (her)
nationality. Nobody shall be forced to determine and declare his (her)
nationality". The Russian word "nationality" means "ethnicity" in
English language and doesn't refer to a citizenship. The word "nation"
is rarely used in the Russian language. According to 2010 Russian
Census, Russia has 194 real ethnic groups.

Population
----------

### Ethnic groups

Culture
-------

### Religion

### Languages

See also
--------

-   Russian nationality law
-   Rossiysky is an adjective to the noun Rossiya (Russia), that means
    "Russia-related" (used in expressions like "Russian president",
    "Russian company", "Russian history", "Russian rouble", etc.)
-   Demographics of Russia
-   All-Russian nation
-   Soviet people
-   Ethnic groups in Russia
    -   Russians are the Russia's most numerous (81% of Russian
        citizens) ethnic group

References
----------

External links
--------------

-   [Rossiyane](http://dic.academic.ru/dic.nsf/ogegova/209642)
    (Dictionary of the Russian Language (Ozhegov))

Category:Demographics of Russia Category:Demonyms Category:Russia
Category:European people Category:Russian people Category:Russian
society Category:Immigrants to Russia
