**Rugby union in Russia** is a growing sport. Russia is ranked 19th
worldwide by the International Rugby Board (IRB), having over three
hundred clubs and close to 22,000 players nationally. Russia has a
professional domestic competition.

Governing body
--------------

The Rugby Union of Russia is the governing body for rugby union in
Russia. It was founded in 1936 originally as the Rugby Union of the
Soviet Union, and a specifically Russian body was set up in 1966. The
Rugby Union of Russia became affiliated to the International Rugby Board
in 1990.

History
-------

### Pre-Revolutionary Russia

Rugby football in the Russian Empire pre-dated the Russian Revolution by
a number of years, but it was only played sporadically. It appears to
have been the first (non-indigenous) football code to be played in
Russia, around a decade before the introduction of association football.
Mr Hopper, a Scotsman, who worked in Moscow arranged a match in the
1880s; the first soccer match was in 1892. In 1886, however, the Russian
police clamped down on rugby because they considered it "brutal, and
liable to incite demonstrations and riots" Condemnation by the tsar's
police probably deterred many people from playing, and records of rugby
over the next thirty years are sparse. Some rugby union was still being
played in 1908, however the first "official" match took place in Moscow
in 1923.

### Soviet period

Because of the Russian Revolution, some Soviet/Russian players emigrated
and/or ended up playing for foreign sides, a notable example being
Prince Alexander Obolensky (Александр Сергеевич Оболенский) who played
for Oxford and England in the 1930s - he was the scorer of 2 tries on
his England debut in their win over New Zealand in January 1936. His
noble birth precluded him from playing in his home country and his
family had fled the country when he was only a year old.

In 1934 the Moscow Championship was started, and in 1936 the first
Soviet Championship took place.

The game was more or less banned for a number of years in the Soviet
Union because of an incident in a final in Moscow, when supporters of
Llanelli and a Bucharest team were involved in a brawl.

In 1949, rugby union was forbidden in the USSR during the "fight against
the cosmopolitanism". The competitions were resumed in 1957, and the
Soviet Championship in 1966. In 1975 the Soviet national team played
their first match.

Although there was the Soviet Cup and the Soviet Championship, rugby
never became a major sport in the USSR. Union was the bigger of the two
codes though - rugby league only really took off in the former Soviet
Union after the collapse of Communism.

### Post-Soviet Russia

When the Soviet Union broke up, there were two main consequences -
firstly the loss of a much larger pool of players and fans, and
secondly, the defection of many players to rugby league, which had
previously been frowned on by the Soviet authorities. The two main areas
for Russian rugby were to be Moscow and Siberia, and to a lesser extent,
Saint Petersburg|Leningrad/St Petersburg.

The most notable Russian player perhaps is Dimitri Mironov who played
for the Barbarians several times during the 1980s. Vasily Artemyev
currently plays for Northampton Saints in the English Premiership.

Russian rugby terminology
-------------------------

Russian language terminology for Rugby union positions

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- ------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------
  1 - форвард первой линии открытой стороны (Left Prop or Loosehead Prop)      2 - отыгрывающий (хукер) (Hooker)                                                                                                   3 - форвард первой линии закрытой стороны (Right Prop or Tighthead Prop)   
  4 - форвард второй линии (2nd Row or Lock)                                   5 - Форвард второй линии (2nd Row or Lock)                                                                                                                                                                     
  6 - Левый крыльевой (Blindside Flanker)                                      8 - Стягивающий (восьмерка)(Number 8)                                                                                               7 - Правый крыльевой (Openside Flanker)                                    
                                                                               9 - Полузащитник схватки (девятка)(Halfback or Scrum-half)                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                            10 - Блуждающий полузащитник (десятка)(First Five-eight or Fly-half)                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   12 - Центральный трёхчетвертной (Second Five-eight or Inside Centre)       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              13 - Центральный трёхчетвертной (Center or Outside Centre)
  11 - Левый крайний трёхчетвертной (Left Wing)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                            15 - Защитник (замок)(Fullback)                                                                                                                   
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------- -- ------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------

Climate
-------

In 1978, Russia set the record for one of the coldest matches ever to be
played, when Krasnoyarsk played Polyechika Alma at -23' C. Because
Krasnoyarsk had travelled over 2,000 km to be there, the game was not
called off. Instead, players resorted to wearing balaclavas, gloves, and
several pairs of tracksuits to combat the cold. Nonetheless, the extreme
climate of Russia remains a problem, with winter sometimes being a split
season, or the game of snow rugby being played.

Popularity
----------

Although association football is the most popular spectator sport in
Russia, rugby has been growing in terms of player base, spectator
interest and media coverage in recent years. Rugby's rise into
mainstream media happened a few years ago when the Heineken Cup, a club
tournament in Europe, was given television coverage on the 7TV sports
channel. 7TV also broadcast the 2003 Rugby World Cup. Subsequently,
Russia's domestic championship, the Professional Rugby League, has
earned weekly coverage on the RTR-Sport channel (a number of countries
also receive this channel, such as Ukraine), though the games are not
shown live. In addition to television coverage, rugby now features in
mainstream news publications. In early 2006, RTR-Sport purchased the
rights to cover the 2007 Rugby World Cup. In 2007 Moscow made an
unsuccessful bid to host the 2009 Rugby World Cup Sevens. It was
announced in February 2009 that the Rugby Union of Russia would again
bid to host the Rugby World Cup Sevens, in 2013. After two other bidders
(Brazil and Germany) withdrew, leaving Russia the only country with an
active bid, Russia was officially named as host in May 2010. Russia also
hosted the IRB Junior World Rugby Trophy, the IRB's second-tier
international competition for under-20 men's teams, in 2010.

Competitions
------------

The main club competition in Russia is the Professional Rugby League, a
fully professional competition. The competing clubs are VVA-Podmoskovye
from Моnino in Moscow Oblast and Slava from Moscow, Enisei-STM and
Krasny Yar both from Krasnoyarsk, RC Penza, RC Novokuznetsk, and
Universitet from Chita Oblast. There also Top League and First League
below the Professional Rugby League possessing a mixture of
professional, semi-professional and amateur teams.

### 2013 Professional League teams

  ------------------- -------------- ----------------------------------- --------------
  **Club**            **City**       **Stadium**                         **Capacity**
  VVA Monino          Monino         Gagarin Air Force Academy stadium   5000
  Yenisey-STM         Krasnoyarsk    Avangard                            5000
  Krasny Yar          Krasnoyarsk    Krasny Yar Stadium                  3200
  Slava Moscow        Moscow         Slava Stadium                       2000
  Spartak GM Moscow   Moscow         Rugby Academy Stadium               \~1000
  Fili Moscow         Moscow         Fili Stadium                        2000
  RC Novokuznetsk     Novokuznetsk   Rugby Stadium                       \~1000
  Strela-Agro Kazan   Kazan          Tulpar Arena                        3000
  RC Bulava           Taganrog       Raduga Stadium                      \~1000
  RC Kuban            Krasnodar      Trud Stadium                        \~1000
  ------------------- -------------- ----------------------------------- --------------

### 2013 Top League Teams

  --------------------------- ---------------
  **Club**                    **City**
  Imperia Penza               Penza
  Narva Zastava               St Petersburg
  Dynamo-Energy               Kazan
  RC Zelenograd               Zelenograd
  VVA Academy                 Monino
  Enisey-STM Krasnoyarsk      Krasnoyarsk
  Strela-Agro Kazan           Kazan
  Maryino                     Moscow
  Zelenograd Moscow           Moscow
  Mai Yuzhny Tushino Moscow   Moscow
  Varyag Novgorod             Novgorod
  --------------------------- ---------------

### Locations of Top 2 Tier Teams 2013

### National champions

  Year   Team              Year   Team              Year   Team
  ------ ----------------- ------ ----------------- ------ -------------
  1992   Krasny Yar        2002   Yenisey-STM       2012   Yenisey-STM
  1993   VVA-Podmoskovye   2003   VVA-Podmoskovye   2013   Krasny Yar
  1994   Krasny Yar        2004   VVA-Podmoskovye
  1995   Krasny Yar        2005   Yenisey-STM
  1996   Krasny Yar        2006   VVA-Podmoskovye
  1997   Krasny Yar        2007   VVA-Podmoskovye
  1998   Krasny Yar        2008   VVA-Podmoskovye
  1999   Yenisey-STM       2009   VVA-Podmoskovye
  2000   Krasny Yar        2010   VVA-Podmoskovye
  2001   Krasny Yar        2011   Yenisey-STM

International
-------------

The Six Nations B, also known as the European Nations Cup (ENC) is
similar to the Six Nations Championship. Russia finished third in the
2001 and 2001–02 competitions and second in the 2007–08 and 2008–10
competitions. Their second-place finish in 2008–10 also secured Russia's
first appearance in the Rugby World Cup, which will take place in 2011
in New Zealand. The Nations Cup was introduced by the IRB in 2006, in
which Russia and Portugal along with Argentina A and Italy A competed in
Portugal.

### Super Powers Cup

The Super Cup was an annual international rugby union competition
contested by national teams from Canada, Japan, Romania and the United
States. It was previously known as the Super Powers Cup.

The Super Powers Cup was first launched in 2003. It was planned that
China, Japan, Russia and the United States would play each other once.
However, because of the SARS outbreak the Chinese team were forced to
withdraw. Russia won the inaugural competition, defeating the USA 30-21
in Krasnoyarsk, Russia. For the 2004 competition Canada replaced China.

National team
-------------

Russia previously played as part of the USSR, and in the early 1990s, as
a combined CIS team. Since 1992 however, they have been playing as
Russia. The team qualified for its first Rugby World Cup by tying
Romania 21-21.

Russia competes regularly in the European Nations Cup, and more
recently, in the Nations Cup.

Russia succeeded in qualifying for the 2011 Rugby World Cup.
