The **Rus** (; ) — ancient people who gave their name to the lands of
Russia and Belarus. Their origin and identity are much in dispute.
Russian scholars, along with some Westerners, consider the Rus to be a
southeastern Slavic tribe that founded a tribal league - the Kievan
state. Ibn Khordadbeh, a Persian geographer of the 9th century also
believed the Rus people are Slavic. Traditional Western scholars believe
them to be a group of Varangians — diverse groups of Norsemen. According
to the Primary Chronicle of Rus', compiled in about 1113 AD, the Rus'
had relocated "from over sea", first to northeastern Europe, creating an
early polity that finally came under the leadership of Rurik. Later,
Rurik's relative Oleg captured Kiev, founding Kievan Rus'. The
descendants of Rurik were the ruling dynasty of Rus' (after 862), and of
principalities created in the area formerly occupied by Kievan Rus',
Galicia-Volhynia (after 1199), Chernigov, Vladimir-Suzdal, Grand Duchy
of Moscow, and the founders of the Tsardom of Russia.

Etymology
---------

According to the most prevalent theory, the name *Rus*, like the Finnish
name for Sweden (*Ruotsi*), is derived from an Old Norse term for "the
men who row" (*rods-*) as rowing was the main method of navigating the
rivers of Eastern Europe, and that it could be linked to the Swedish
coastal area of Roslagen (*Rus-law*) or *Roden*, as it was known in
earlier times. The name *Rus* would then have the same origin as the
Finnish and Estonian names for Sweden: *Ruotsi* and *Rootsi*.

Another theory is that the name comes from the Sarmatian of the
*Roxolani*, who inhabited southern Ukraine, Moldova and Romania (from
the Old Persian *rokhs*, meaning light, white, dirty blond).

Key sources
-----------

### Slavic sources

According to the earliest East Slavic record, the Primary Chronicle, the
Rus' were a group of Varangians among others like Swedes and Gutes who
lived on the other side of the Baltic Sea, in Scandinavia and as far as
the land of the English and the French. The Varangians were first
expelled, then invited to rule the warring Slavic and Finnic tribes of
Novgorod:

Later, the Primary Chronicle tells us, they conquered Kiev and created
the state of Kievan Rus' (which, as most historians agree, was preceded
by the Rus' Khaganate). The territory they conquered was named after
them as were, eventually, the local people (see Etymology of Rus and
derivatives for further details).

### Islamic sources

Ibn Haukal and two other early Islamic sources such as Muhammad
al-Idrisi, who would follow them later, distinguish three groups of the
Rus: Kuyavia, Slavia, and Arcania. In the mainstream Russian-Soviet
historiography (as represented by Boris Rybakov), these were tentatively
identified with the "tribal centres" at Kiev, Novgorod and Tmutarakan.

The Muslim diplomat and traveller, Ahmad ibn Fadlan, who visited Volga
Bulgaria in 922, described the Rus' (*Rusiyyah*) in the terms strongly
suggestive of the Norsemen:

Apart from Ibn Fadlan's account, the Normanist theory draws heavily on
the evidence of the Persian traveler Ibn Rustah who allegedly visited
Novgorod (or Tmutarakan, according to George Vernadsky) and described
how the Rus' exploited the Slavs.

### Byzantine sources

:   *Further information: Rus'–Byzantine War and Rus'–Byzantine Treaty*

When the Varangians first appeared in Constantinople (the Paphlagonian
expedition of the Rus' in the 820s and the Siege of Constantinople in
860), the Byzantines seem to have perceived the *Rhos*  as a different
people from the Slavs. At least no source says they are part of the
Slavic race. Characteristically, pseudo-Symeon Magister refers to the
Rhos as Δρομῖται (transliterated as Dromitai), a word related to the
Greek word meaning *a run*, suggesting the mobility of their movement by
waterways.

In his treatise *De Administrando Imperio*, Constantine VII describes
the Rhos as the neighbours of Pechenegs who buy from the latter cows,
horses, and sheep "because none of these animals may be found in
Rhosia". His description represents the Rus' as a warlike northern
tribe. Constantine also enumerates the names of the Dnieper cataracts in
both *Rhos* and in *Slavic* languages. The Rhos names have distinct
Germanic etymology:

-   Essoupi (Old Norse *vesuppi*, "do not sleep")
-   Oulvorsi (Old Norse *holmfors*, "island rapid")
-   Gelandri (Old Norse *gjallandi*, "yelling, loudly ringing")
-   Aeifor (Old Norse *eiforr*, "ever fierce")
-   Varouforos (Old Norse *varufors*, "cliff rapid" or *barufors*, "wave
    rapid")
-   Leanti (Old Norse *leandi*, "seething", or *hlæjandi*, "laughing")
-   Stroukoun (Old Norse *strukum*, "rapid current").

### Western European sources

The first Western European source to mention the Rus' are the Annals of
St. Bertin. These relate that Emperor Louis the Pious' court at
Ingelheim, in 839, was visited by a delegation from the Byzantine
emperor. In this delegation there were two men who called themselves
*Rhos* (*Rhos vocari dicebant*). Louis enquired about their origins and
learnt that they were Swedes. Fearing that they were spies for their
brothers, the Danes, he incarcerated them. Subsequently, in the 10th and
11th centuries, Latin sources routinely confused the Rus' with the
extinct East Germanic tribe of Rugians. Olga of Kiev, for instance, was
designated in one manuscript as a Rugian queen.

Another source comes from Liutprand of Cremona, a 10th-century Lombard
bishop who in a report from Constantinople to Holy Roman Emperor Otto I
wrote that he had met "the Russians whom we know by the other name of
Norsemen.

History
-------

Having settled Aldeigja (Ladoga) in the 750s, Scandinavian colonists
played an important role in the early ethnogenesis of the Rus' people
and in the formation of the Rus' Khaganate. The Varangians (*Varyags*,
in Old East Slavic) are first mentioned by the Primary Chronicle as
having exacted tribute from the Slavic and Finnic tribes in 859. It was
the time of rapid expansion of the Vikings in Northern Europe; England
began to pay Danegeld in 859, and the Curonians of Grobin faced an
invasion by the Swedes at about the same date.

Due largely to geographic considerations, it is often argued that most
of the Varangians who traveled and settled in the eastern Baltic, Russia
and lands to the south came from the area of modern Sweden .

The Varangians left a number of rune stones in their native Sweden that
tell of their journeys to what is today Russia, Ukraine, Greece, and
Belarus. Most of these rune stones can be seen today, and are a telling
piece of historical evidence. The Varangian runestones tell of many
notable Varangian expeditions, and even account for the fates of
individual warriors and travelers.

The Vikings allegedly had some enduring influence in Rus, as testified
by loan words ''(these ones persist from Glagolitic script at Adriatic
*prior and out* of any Vikings)'', such as *yabeda* "complaining person"
(from *æmbætti*, *embætti* "office"), *skot* "cattle" (? from *skattr*
"tax") and knout (from *knútr*, "a knotty wood"). Moreover three Nordic
names of the first Varangian rulers also became popular among the later
Rurikids and then among the East Slavic people in general: Oleg (Helgi),
Olga (Helga) and Igor (Ingvar).

Academic history
----------------

The Western account of the Norsemen was introduced to Russians by the
German historian Gerhardt Friedrich Müller (1705–1783), who was invited
to work in the Russian Academy of Sciences in 1748. At the beginning of
an important speech in 1749, Müller declared that the "glorious
Scandinavians conquered all the Russian lands with their victorious
arms". This statement caused much anger in the hearts of his Russian
audience, and earned him much animosity during his professional career
in Russia. The remainder of the speech represented a lengthy list of
Russian defeats by the Germans and Swedes, Müller was forced to curtail
his lecture by shouts of anger from the audience. The scathing criticism
from Lomonosov, Krasheninnikov, and other Russian historians led to
Müller being forced to suspend his work on the issue until Lomonosov's
death. Although the printed text of the original lecture was destroyed,
Müller managed to rework it and had it reprinted as *Origines Rossicae*
in 1768.

There were however some Russian historians that accepted this historical
account—including Nikolai Karamzin (1766–1826) and his disciple Mikhail
Pogodin (1800–75)—gave credit to the claims of the Primary Chronicle
that the Varangians were invited by East Slavs to rule over them and
bring order. The theory was not without political implications. In
Karamzin's writing the Norse migration formed the basis and
justification for Russian autocracy (as opposed to anarchy of the
pre-Rurikid period), and Pogodin used the theory to advance his view
that Russia was immune to social upheavals and revolutions, because the
Russian state originated from a voluntary treaty between the people of
Novgorod and Varangian rulers.

Genetic studies in the "Family Tree DNA Rurikid Dynasty Project" support
the Norse theory, pinpointing the origin of the Monomakhovich (the
descendants of Vladimir II Monomakh) branch of Rurikid descendants' DNA
consistent with the North Germanic inhabitants of Uppland, North of
Stockholm in Sweden.

### Anti-Normanism

Starting with Lomonosov (1711–1765), scholars from Eastern Europe have
criticised the idea of Norse invaders. In the early 20th century, the
traditional anti-Normanist doctrine (as articulated by Dmitry Ilovaisky)
seemed to have lost currency, but in Stalinist Russia, the
anti-Normanist arguments were revived and adopted in official Soviet
historiography. Mikhail Artamonov ranks among those who attempted to
reconcile both theories by hypothesizing that the Kievan state united
the southern Rus' (of Slavic stock) and the northern Rus' (of Germanic
stock) into a single nation.

The staunchest advocate of the anti-Normanist views in the post-WWII
period was Boris Rybakov, who argued that the cultural level of the
Varangians could not have warranted an invitation from the culturally
advanced Slavs. This conclusion leads Slavicists to deny the Primary
Chronicle, which writes that the Varangian Rus' were invited by the
native Slavs. Rybakov assumed, that Nestor, putative author of the
Chronicle, was biased against the pro-Greek party of Vladimir Monomakh
and supported the pro-Scandinavian party of the ruling prince
Svyatopolk. He cites Nestor as a pro-Scandinavian manipulator and
compares his account of Rurik's invitation with numerous similar stories
found in folklore around the world.

There have been quite a few alternative, non-Normanist origins for the
word *Rus*, although none was endorsed in the Western academic
mainstream:

-   Three early emperors of the Urartian Empire at Caucasus from 8th to
    6th century B.C. had their names *Russa I, Russa II* and *Russa
    III*, documented in cuneiform monuments.
-   The medieval Ukrainian and Polish legend of three brothers, one
    named Lech, Čech, and Rus|*Rus*, had also its predecessor in very
    similar legend from ancient Armenians with almost the same classical
    name (studies by D.J. Marr). Furthermore, Kiev was founded centuries
    before the Rus' rule.
-   The ancient Sarmatian tribe of the *Roxolani* (from the Ossetic,
    *ruhs* ‘light’; R *русые волосы* /rusyje volosy/ "light-brown hair";
    cf. Dahl's dictionary definition of *Русь* /rus/: *Русь ж. в знач.
    мир, белсвет.* Rus, fig. world, universe [*белсвет*: lit. "white
    world", "white light"]).
-   From the Old Slavic name that meant "river-people" (tribes of
    fishermen and ploughmen who settled near the rivers Dnieper, Don,
    Dniester and Western Dvina and were known to navigate them). The
    *rus* root is preserved in the modern Slavic and Russian words
    "*ruslo*" (river-bed), "*rusalka*" (water sprite), etc.
-   From one of two rivers in Ukraine (near Kiev and Pereyaslav), *Ros*
    and *Rusna*, whose names are derived from a postulated Slavic term
    for water, akin to *rosa* (dew) (related to the above theory).
-   A Slavic word *rusy* (refers only to hair color — from dark
    ash-blond to light-brown), cognate with *ryzhy* (red-haired) and
    English *red*.
-   A postulated proto-Slavic word for bear, cognate with Greek *arctos*
    and Latin *ursus*.

According to F. Donald Logan (*The Vikings in History*, cit. Montgomery,
p. 24), "in 839, the Rus' were Swedes. In 1043, the Rus' were Slavs."
The Scandinavians were assimilated and, unlike their brethren in England
and in Normandy, they left little cultural heritage in Eastern Europe.
This near absence of cultural traces (besides several names, as
discussed above, and arguably the *veche*-system of Novgorod, comparable
to *thing* in Scandinavia), is remarkable, and the Slavicists therefore
call the Vikings "*cultural chameleons*", who came, ruled and then
disappeared, leaving little cultural trace in Eastern Europe.

### Beyond the Normanist/ anti-normanist debate

Scholars such as Omeljan Pritsak and Horace G. Lunt offer explanations
that go beyond simplistic attempts to attribute 'ethnicity' on *prima
facie* interpretation of literary, philological, and archaeological
evidence. They view the Rus' as disparate, and often mutually
antagonistic, clans of charismatic warriors and traders who formed
wide-ranging networks across the North and Baltic Seas. They were a
"multi-ethnic, multilingual and non-territorial community of sea nomads
and trading settlements" that contained numerous Norsemen—but equally
Slavs, Balts, and Finns.

Whilst all their names appear to have been originally Scandinavian, this
might reflect the sacral position held by the island of Upssala.
Evidence provided by the Primary Chronicle, written some three centuries
later, cannot be taken as an accurate ethnographic account; as tales of
'migration' from distant lands were common literary *topoi* used by
rulers to legitimise their contemporary rule whilst at the same time
differentiating themselves from their "Baltic" and "Slavic" subject
tribes. Tolochko argues "the story of the royal clan's journey is a
device with its own function within the narrative of the chronicle. ...
Yet if we take it for what it actually is, if we accept that it is not a
documentary ethnographic description of the tenth century, but a
medieval *origo gentis* masterfully constructed by a Christian cleric of
the early 12th century, then we have to reconsider the established
scholarly narrative of the earliest phase of East European history,
which owes so much to the Primary Chronicle.

The presence of artefacts of a Scandiavian affinity in northern Russia
are a surety, however exchange between the north and southern shores of
the Baltic had occurred since the Iron Age (albeit limited to
immediately coastal areas). Northern Russia and adjacent Finnic lands
had become a profitable meeting ground for peoples of diverse origins,
especially for the trade of furs, and attracted by the presence of
oriental silver from the mid-8th century AD. There is an undeniable
presence of goods and people of Scandinavian origin; however, the
predominant people remained the local (Baltic and Finnic)
hunter-gatherers.

The increasing volume of trade and internal competition necessitated
higher forms of organization. The Rus' appeared to emulate aspects of
Khazar political organization—hence the appearance of a Rus' *chaganus*
in the Carolingian court in 839 (*Royal Frankish Annals*).
Legitimization was sought by way of adopting a Christian and
linguistically Slavic *high culture* that became the *Kieven Rus'*. The
burials ('chamber' or 'retainer' graves) attributed to the Kievan Rus'
have only a superficial resemblance to supposed Scandinavian
prototypes—only the grave construction was similar, whilst the range of
accompanying artefacts, the inclusion of weapons, horses and slave girls
have no parallels in Scandinavia. Moreover, there is doubt if the
emerging Kievan Rus' were the same clan as the "Rus" who visited the
Carolingians in 839 or who attacked Constantinople in 860 AD.

The rise of Kiev itself is mysterious. Devoid of any silver dirrham
finds in the 8th century AD, it was situated west of the profitable fur
and silver trade networks that spanned from the Baltic to the Muslim
lands, via the Volga-Kama basins. At the prime hill in Kiev,
fortifications and other symbols of consolidation and power appear from
the 9th century, thus preceding the literary appearance of 'Rus' in the
middle Dnieper region. By the 10th century, the lowlands around Kiev had
extensive 'Slavic' styled settlements, and there is evidence of growing
trade with the Byzantine lands. This might have attracted Rus'
movements, and a shift in power, from the north to Kiev. Thus, Kiev does
not appear to have evolved from the infrastructure of the Scandinavian
trade networks, but rather it forcibly took over them; as evidenced by
the destruction of numerous earlier trade settlements in the north,
including the famous Staraja Ladoga.

Notes
-----

References
----------

-   *The Annals of Saint-Bertin*, transl. Janet L. Nelson, Ninth-Century
    Histories 1 (Manchester and New York, 1991).
-   Davies, Norman. *Europe: A History*. New York: Oxford University
    Press, 1996.
-   Christian, David. *A History of Russia, Mongolia, and Central Asia*.
    Blackwell, 1999.
-   Danylenko, Andrii. "The name Rus': In search of a new dimension."
    Jahrbueher fuer Geschichte Osteuropas 52 (2004), 1–32.
-   Davidson, H.R. Ellis, *The Viking Road to Byzantium*. Allen & Unwin,
    1976.
-   Dolukhanov, Pavel M. *The Early Slavs: Eastern Europe from the
    Initial Settlement to the Kievan Rus.* New York: Longman, 1996.
-   Duczko, Wladyslaw.
    *[<http://books.google.com/books?id=hEawXSP4AVwC&pg=PA132#v=onepage&q>=&f=false
    Viking Rus: Studies on the Presence of Scandinavians in Eastern
    Europe] (The Northern World; 12)*. Leiden: Brill Academic
    Publishers, 2004 (hardcover, ISBN 90-04-13874-9).
-   Goehrke, C. *Frühzeit des Ostslaven.* Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
    Buchgesellschaft, 1992.
-   Magocsi, Paul R. *A History of Ukraine.* Toronto: University of
    Toronto Press, 1996.
-   Pritsak, Omeljan. *The Origin of Rus*. Cambridge Mass.: Harvard
    University Press, 1991.
-   Stang, Hakon. *The Naming of Russia.* Oslo: Middelelser, 1996.
-   [Gerard Miller as the author of the Normanist
    theory](http://www.cultinfo.ru/fulltext/1/001/007/066/66944.htm)
    (Brockhaus and Efron)
-   *On the language of old Rus: some questions and suggestions.* Horace
    Gray Lunt. Harvard University, Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute,
    1975
-   *The Emergence of Rus: 750–1200.* Simon Franklin, Jonathan Shephard.
    Longman Publishing Group, 1996
-   *The Origin of Rus*. Omeljan Pritsak. Harvard University Press, 1981
-   The Primary Chronicle's 'Ethnography' Revisited: Slavs and
    Varangians in the Middle Dnieper Region and the Origin of the Rus'
    State. Olksiy P Tolochko; in *Franks, Northmen and Slavs. Identities
    and State Formation in Early Medieval Europe*. Editors: Ildar H.
    Garipzanov, Patrick J. Geary, and Przemysław Urbańczyk. Brepols,
    2008.

External links
--------------

-   [Ibn Fadlan and the Rusiyyah, by James E. Montgomery, with full
    translation of Ibn
    Fadlan](http://www.uib.no/jais/v003ht/03-001-025Montgom1.htm)

Category:People of medieval Rus'| Category:Rus|People Category:North
Germanic peoples Category:Varangians Category:Viking Age people
Category:Origin hypotheses of ethnic groups
