The **Rus' Khaganate** is the name applied by modern historians to a
polity that was postulated to exist during a poorly documented period in
the history of Eastern Europe, roughly the late 8th and early-to-mid-9th
centuries AD.

It was suggested that the Rus' Khaganate was a state, or a cluster of
city-states, set up by a people called *Rus*', who may have been
Norsemen, somewhere in what is today European Russia, as a chronological
predecessor to the Rurik Dynasty and the Kievan Rus'. The region's
population at that time was composed of Baltic, Slavic, Finnic, Turkic,
Hungarian, and Norse peoples. The region was also a place of operations
for Varangians, eastern Scandinavian adventurers, merchants, and
pirates.

While there have been several theories, the prevailing opinion today (as
of 2013) is that the population centers of the region may have included
the proto-towns of Holmgard, Aldeigja, Lyubsha, Alaborg, Sarskoye
Gorodishche, and Timerevo.

According to sparse contemporaneous sources, the leader or leaders of
Rus people at this time were using the Old Turkic title Khagan, hence
the suggested name of their organization.

This period is thought to be the times of the genesis of a distinct Rus'
ethnos, which gave rise to Kievan Rus' and later states from which
modern Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine evolved.

Documentary evidence
--------------------

The title of "khagan" for a leader of some groups of Rus' people is
mentioned in several historical sources, most of them foreign texts
dating from the 9th century, while three East Slavic sources date from
the 11th and 12th centuries. The earliest European reference related to
the Rus' people ruled by a *khagan* comes from the Frankish *Annals of
St. Bertin*, which refer to a group of Norsemen who called themselves
*Rhos* (*qui se, id est gentem suam, Rhos vocari dicebant*) and visited
Constantinople around the year 838. Fearful of returning home via the
steppes, which would leave them vulnerable to attacks by the Magyars,
these Rhos travelled through the Frankish Empire accompanied by Greek
ambassadors from the Byzantine emperor Theophilus. When questioned by
the Frankish Emperor Louis the Pious at Ingelheim, they stated that
their leader was known as *chacanus* (hypothesized to be either the
Latin word for "Khagan" or a deformation of Scandinavian proper name
*Håkan*), that they lived far to the north, and that they were Swedes
(*comperit eos gentis esse sueonum*). Ibn Rustah mentions only two
khagans in his treatise — those of Khazaria and Rus.

A further near-contemporary reference to the Rus' comes from al-Yaqubi,
who wrote in 889 or 890 that the Caucasus mountaineers, when besieged by
the Arabs in 854, asked for help from the overlords (*sahib*) of al-Rum
(Byzantium), Khazaria, and al-Saqaliba (Slavs). According to Zuckerman,
Ibn Khordadbeh and other Arab authors often confused the terms Rus and
Saqaliba when describing their raids to the Caspian Sea in the 9th and
10th centuries. *But n.b.*, Ibn Khordādbeh's *Book of Roads and
Kingdoms* does not mention the title of Khagan for the ruler of Rus'.

*Hudud al-Alam*, an anonymous Persian geography text written in the late
10th century, refers to the Rus' king as "Khāqān-i Rus". As the unknown
author of *Hudud al-Alam* relied on numerous 9th-century sources,
including Ibn Khordādbeh, it is possible that his reference to the Rus'
Khagan was copied from earlier, pre-Rurikid texts, rather than
reflecting contemporary political reality.

Finally, the 11th century Persian geographer Abu Said Gardizi mentioned
"khāqān-i rus" in his work *Zayn al-Akhbār*. Like other Muslim
geographers, Gardizi relied on traditions stemming from the 9th century.

Dating
------

Image:Ög 8, Västra Steninge.jpg|thumb|upright|The [Kälvesten runestone
dates to the 9th century, the oldest known runestone telling of
expeditions in the East.](Varangian Runestones#Ög_8 "wikilink")

Extant primary sources make it plausible that the title of *khagan* was
applied to the rulers of the Rus' during a rather short period, roughly
between their embassy to Constantinople (838) and Basil I's letter
(871). All Byzantine sources after Basil I refer to the Rus' rulers as
*archons* (Greek for "ruler").

The dating of the Khaganate's existence has been the subject of debates
among scholars and remains unclear. Paul Robert Magocsi and Omeljan
Pritsak date the foundation of the Khaganate to be around the year 830.
According to Magocsi, "A violent civil war took place during the 820s
with "The losers of the internal political struggle, known as Kabars,
fled northward to the Varangian Rus' in the upper Volga region, near
Rostov, and southward to the Magyars, who formerly had been loyal
vassals of the Khazars. The presence of Kabar political refugees from
Khazaria among the Varangian traders in Rostov helped to raise the
latter's prestige, with the consequence that by the 830s a new power
center known as the Rus' Kaganate had come into existence." Whatever the
accuracy of such estimates may be, there are no primary sources
mentioning the Rus' or its khagans prior to the 830s.

Equally contentious has been discussion about the date of the
khaganate's disintegration. The title of Khagan is not mentioned in the
Rus'-Byzantine treaties (907, 911, 944), or in *De Ceremoniis*, a record
of court ceremonials meticulously documenting the titles of foreign
rulers, when it deals with Olga's reception at the court of Constantine
VII in 945. Moreover, ibn Fadlan, in his detailed account of the Rus
(922), designated their supreme ruler as *malik* ("king"). From this
fact, Peter Golden concluded via an argumentum ex silentio that the
khaganate collapsed at some point between 871 and 922. Zuckerman,
meanwhile, argues that the absence of the title "khagan" from the first
Russo-Byzantine Treaty proves that the khaganate had vanished by 911.
Anatoly Novoseltsev hypothesizes that the adoption of the title "khagan"
was designed to advertise the Rus' claims to the equality with the
Khazars. This theory is echoed by Thomas Noonan, who asserts that the
Rus' leaders were loosely unified under the rule of one of the
"sea-kings" in the early 9th century, and that this "High King" adopted
the title "khagan" to give him legitimacy in the eyes of his subjects
and neighboring states. According to this theory, the title was a sign
that the bearers ruled under a divine mandate.

Economy
-------

The likely mainstay of the khaganate's economy was the Volga trade
route. Early 9th-century coin hoards unearthed in Scandinavia frequently
contain large quantities of dirhem coins minted in the Abbasid Caliphate
and other Muslim polities, sometimes split into smaller pieces and
inscribed with Runic signs. All in all, more than 228,000 Arabic coins
have been recovered from over 1,000 hoards in European Russia and the
Baltic region. Almost 90% of these arrived in Scandinavia by way of the
Volga trade route. Unsurprisingly, the dirhem was the basis for the
monetary system of Kievan Rus'.

Trade was the major source of income for the Rus, who according to ibn
Rustah did not engage in agriculture: "They have no cultivated fields
but depend for their supplies on what they can obtain from as-Saqaliba's
[Slavs] land. They have no estates, villages, or fields; their only
business is to trade in sable, squirrel, and other furs, and the money
they take in these transactions they stow in their belts." Rus merchants
travelled down the Volga, paying duties to the Bulghars and Khazars, to
the ports of Gorgan and Abaskun on the southern shore of the Caspian
Sea; on occasion they travelled as far as Baghdad.

Government
----------

Writing in 922, Ibn Fadlan described the Rus' ruler (like the Khazar
khagan), as having little real authority. Instead, political and
military power was wielded by a deputy, who "commands the troops,
attacks [the Rus' ruler's] enemies, and acts as his representative
before his subjects." The supreme king of the Rus', on the other hand,
"has no duties other than to make love to his slave girls, drink, and
give himself up to pleasure." He was guarded by 400 men, "willing to die
for him ... These 400 sit below the royal throne: a large and bejewelled
platform which also accommodates the forty slave-girls of his harem."
Ibn Fadlan wrote that the Rus' ruler would almost never leave his throne
and even "when he wants to go riding his horse is led up to him, and on
his return the horse is brought right up to the throne." Ibn Rustah, on
the other hand, reported that the khagan was the ultimate authority in
settling disputes between his subjects. His decisions, however, were not
binding, so that if one of the disputants disagreed with the khagan's
ruling, the dispute was then resolved in a battle, which took place "in
the presence of the contestants' kin who stand with swords drawn; and
the man who gets the better of the duel also gets the decision about the
matter in dispute."

The dichotomy between the relative powerlessness of the nominal ruler
and the great authority of his subordinate reflects the structure of
Khazar government, with secular authority in the hands of a Khagan Bek
only theoretically subordinate to the khagan, and it agrees with the
traditional Germanic system, where there could be a division between the
king and the military commander. Moreover, some scholars have noted
similarities between this dual kingship and the postulated relationship
between Igor and Oleg of Kiev in the early 10th century (compare Askold
and Dir in the 9th century). The institution of separate sacral ruler
and military commander may be observed in the reconstructed relationship
between Oleg and Igor, but whether this is part of the Rus' Khaganate's
legacy to its successor-state is unknown. The early Kievan Rus'
principalities exhibited certain distinctive characteristics in their
government, military organization, and jurisprudence that were
comparable to those in force among the Khazars and other steppe peoples;
some historians believe that these elements came to Kievan Rus' from the
Khazars by way of the earlier Rus' Khagans.

Customs and religion
--------------------

Image:trizna 1899.jpg|left|thumb|*Oleg being mourned by his warriors*,
an 1899 painting by Viktor Vasnetsov. This burial rite, with the
funerary tumulus, is typical of both Scandinavian, and Eurasian nomadic
customs. Judging from excavations conducted since the 1820s at Ladoga
and related sites in Northern Russia, the Rus' customs reflected
primarily Scandinavian influences. This is consistent with the writings
of ibn Rustah and ibn Fadlan. The former gives a brief description of
the burial of a Rus' nobleman, who was put into a "grave like a large
house", together with food, amulets, coins, other staples, as well as
his favorite wife. "Then the grave door is sealed and she dies there."
Ibn Fadlan provides further evidence of the Rus' building a memorial
mound, or cenotaph, and giving it a runic inscription on a piece of
wood. The Arab traveler also left a detailed description of the Rus'
custom of cremating noblemen in a ship, which involved both animal and
human sacrifice. When a poor man died, he was put into a little ship and
burned in it; the funeral of a nobleman was much more elaborate. His
estate was divided into three parts: one for his family, one to pay for
his funerary costume, and one to make beer, which was consumed on the
day of his cremation. One of the deceased man's slave girls volunteered
to be put to death so as to join her master in paradise. On the day of
cremation, the dead man was disinterred from his grave, dressed in fine
clothings, and put onto a specially constructed ship. The volunteer
slave girl was killed (after the deceased man's kinsmen and friends had
sex with her) and placed on board together with her master before the
dead man's nearest kinsman set the vessel on fire. The funeral ended
with the construction of a round mound.

Early medieval historians were impressed with the spirit of independence
and enterprise inculcated among the Rus from birth. Ibn Rustah writes:
"When a son is born the father will go up to the newborn baby, sword in
hand; throwing it down, he says; 'I shall not leave you any property:
you have only what you can provide with this weapon!'" Al-Marwazi
repeated this description of the instructions given to a son and added
that it was the daughter who received her father's inheritance. The same
sense of rugged individualism was reflected in their treatment of the
ill. According to ibn Fadlan, "if one of the Rus falls sick they put him
in a tent by himself and leave bread and water for him. They do not
visit him, however, or speak to him, especially if he is a serf. Should
he recover he rejoins the others; if he dies they burn him. If he
happens to be a serf, however, they leave him for the dogs and vultures
to devor." Sources describe the Rus as liberal in sexual matters. Ibn
Fadlan wrote that the king of the Rus did not shy away from having
public intercourse with the slave girls in his harem. When Rus traders
arrived to the Volga shores, they would make love with the slave girls
they brought for sale in the presence of their comrades; sometimes this
would develop into a communal orgy. Image:Idoly.jpg|thumb|upright|*The
Idols*, a painting by Nicholas Roerich (1901)

Both ibn Fadlan and ibn Rustah portray the Rus as devout pagans. Ibn
Rustah and, following him, Garizi reported that the Rus shamans or
"medicine men" (*attiba*) wielded great power over the common folk.
According to ibn Rustah, these shamans acted "as if they own
everything". They determined what women, men, or animals had to be
sacrificed, and there was no appealing their decisions. A shaman would
take the selected offering, whether human or animal, and hang it from a
pole until it died. Ibn Fadlan left a description of the Rus merchants
praying for success in trading before "a large wooden stake with a face
like that of a human being, surrounded by smaller figures, and behind
them tall poles in the ground." If trade did not pick up, more offerings
were made; if the business remained slow, the trader would make
offerings to the minor idols, too. When the trading was especially good,
Rus merchants would likewise make additional offerings of cattle and
sheep, some of which were distributed as alms.

On the other hand, Byzantine sources report that the Rus adopted
Christianity by the end of the 860s. In his encyclical dated to 867,
Patriarch Photius wrote about the enthusiastic conversion of the Rus,
mentioning that he had sent to their lands a bishop. Constantine VII
attributes the conversion to his grandfather Basil the Macedonian and to
Patriarch Ignatius rather than to their predecessors Michael III and
Photius. Constantine narrates how the Byzantines galvanized the Rus'
into conversion by their persuasive words and rich presents, including
gold, silver, and precious fabrics. He also repeats a traditional story
that the pagans were particularly impressed by a miracle: a gospel book
thrown by the archbishop into an oven was not damaged by fire. Ibn
Khordadbeh wrote in the late 9th century that the Rus who arrived to
Muslim lands "claimed to be Christians". Modern historians are divided
in their views on the historicity and extent of the Christianization of
the Rus' Khaganate.

Relations with neighbors
------------------------

In 838, the Rus' Khaganate sent an embassy to the Byzantine Empire,
which was recorded in the Annals of St. Bertin. The purpose of this
embassy remains controversial among historians. Aleksey Shakhmatov
argued that the embassy was meant to establish amity with Byzantium and
to open up the way into Sweden through Western Europe. Constantine
Zuckerman postulates that the Rus' ambassadors were to negotiate a peace
treaty after their Paphlagonian expedition of the 830s. George Vernadsky
connects their mission with the construction of the fortress of Sarkel
in 833. That embassy was not recorded in Byzantine sources, and in 860
Patriarch Photius referred to the Rus as "unknown people".

According to Vernadsky, the Khazars and Greeks erected Sarkel near the
portage between the Don River and Volga specifically to defend this
strategic point from the Rus. Other scholars, however, believe that the
fortress of Sarkel was constructed to defend against or monitor the
activities of the Magyars and other steppe tribes, and not the Rus'. The
Ukrainian historian Mykhailo Hrushevsky declared that the extant sources
were unclear on this point. John Skylitzes claimed that Sarkel was a
"staunch bulwark against the Pechenegs" but did not identify that as its
original purpose.

In 860, the Rus besieged Constantinople, with a fleet of 200 ships. The
Byzantine army and navy were far from the capital, leaving it vulnerable
to the attack. The timing of the expedition suggests that the Rus were
well-aware of the internal situation in the empire thanks to the
commercial and other relations that continued after the embassy of 838.
The Rus warriors devastated the suburbs of Constantinople before
suddenly departing on August 4.

The early Rus' traded extensively with Khazaria. Ibn Khordadbeh wrote in
the *Book of Roads and Kingdoms* that "they go via the Slavic River (the
Don) to Khamlidj, a city of the Khazars, where the latter's ruler
collects the tithe from them." Some modern commentators infer from Arab
accounts that the Rus' Khaganate's political culture was profoundly
influenced by its contacts with Khazaria. By the beginning of the
Rurikid period in the first decades of the 10th century, however,
relations between the Rus' and the Khazars soured.

Decline and legacy
------------------

Soon after Patriarch Photius informed other Orthodox bishops about the
Christianization of the Rus, all the centres of the khaganate in
North-Western Russia were destroyed by fire. Archaeologists found
convincing evidence that Holmgard, Aldeigja, Alaborg, Izborsk and other
local centres were burnt to the ground in the 860s or 870s. Some of
these settlements were permanently abandoned after the conflagration.
The Primary Chronicle describes the uprising of the pagan Slavs and
Chudes (Finnic peoples) against the Varangians, who had to withdraw
overseas in 862. The First Novgorod Chronicle, whose account of the
events Shakhmatov considered more trustworthy, does not pinpoint the
pre-Rurikid uprising to any specific date. The 16th century Nikon
Chronicle attributes the banishment of the Varangians from the country
to Vadim the Bold. The Ukrainian historian Mykhailo Braichevsky labelled
Vadim's rebellion "a pagan reaction" against the Christianization of the
Rus'. A period of unrest and anarchy followed, dated by Zuckerman to ca.
875–900. The absence of coin hoards from the 880s and 890s suggests that
the Volga trade route ceased functioning, precipitating "the first
silver crisis in Europe".

After this economic depression and period of political upheaval, the
region experienced a resurgence beginning in around 900. Zuckerman
associates this recovery with the arrival of Rurik and his men, who
turned their attention from the Volga to the Dnieper, for reasons as yet
uncertain. The Scandinavian settlements in Ladoga and Novgorod revived
and started to grow rapidly. During the first decade of the 10th
century, a large trade outpost was formed on the Dnieper in Gnezdovo,
near modern Smolensk. Another Dnieper settlement, Kiev, developed into
an important urban centre roughly in the same period.

The fate of the Rus' Khaganate, and the process by which it either
evolved into or was consumed by the Rurikid Kievan Rus', is unclear. The
Kievans seem to have had a very vague notion about the existence of the
khaganate. Slavonic sources do not mention either the Christianization
of the Rus in the 860s nor the Paphlagonian expedition of the 830s. The
account of the Rus' expedition against Constantinople in the 860s was
borrowed by the authors of the Primary Chronicle from Greek sources,
suggesting the absence of a vernacular written tradition.
