:   *Name of Russia redirects here. See Name of Russia (Russia TV) for
    the television programme.*

Originally, the name ***Rus’*** (Русь, *Rus*) referred to the people,
the region, and the medieval states (9th to 12th centuries) of the
Kievan Rus' polities. In the Western culture it is better known as
Ruthenia from the 11th century onwards. Its territories are today
distributed among Belarus, Ukraine, and a part of the European section
of the Russian Federation.

One of the earliest written sources mentioning the people called Rus'
(as *Rhos*) dates back to year 839 AD in a Royal Frankish chronicle
*Annales Bertiniani*; the Frankish authorities identified them as a
Germanic tribe called the Swedes. According to the Kievan Rus' *Primary
Chronicle*, compiled in about 1113 AD, the Rus' were a group of
Varangians, Norsemen who had relocated somewhere from the Baltic region
(literally "from beyond the sea"), first to Northeastern Europe, then to
the south where they created the medieval Kievan state.

The modern name of Russia (*Rossiya*), which came into use in the 17th
century, is derived from the Greek *Ῥωσσία* (transliterated *Rossia*,
nowadays spelled *Ρωσία* and transliterated *Rosia*) which in turn
derives from *Ῥῶς* (transliteration: *Ros*), an early Greek name for the
people of Rus'. "*Rus*'" as a state had no proper name; by its
inhabitants it was called "rusĭska zemlya".(*русьска(я) земля*) (with
*rusĭska* alternatively spelled *russka*, *rus'ka*, and most often
*ruska*), which might be translated as "Land of the Rus'". The word
"rusĭska" is an adjective: the morpheme *-ĭsk-* is cognate with "-ish";
*-a* marks feminine adjectives (namely, *zemlya*, "land", is
grammatically feminine in Slavic). In similar fashion, Poland is called
*Polska* by its inhabitants, that is, *Pol-sk-a*, originally being the
adjective *Polish* (land).

To distinguish the medieval "Rus'" state from other states that derived
from it, modern historiography calls it "Kievan Rus'." Its predecessor,
the 9th century "Rus' Khaganate," is a somewhat hypothetical state whose
existence is inferred from a handful of early medieval Byzantine and
Persian/Arabic sources that mention that the Rus' people were governed
by a khagan.

Etymology
---------

.

]] According to the most prominent theory, the name Rus', like the
Finnish name for Sweden (Ruotsi), is derived from an Old Norse term for
"the men who row" (*rods-*) as rowing was the main method of navigating
the rivers of Eastern Europe, and that it could be linked to the Swedish
coastal area of Roslagen (the Rowing crews) or *Roden*, as it was known
in earlier times. The name Rus' would then have the same origin as the
Finnish, Saami, Estonian and Võro language|Võro names for Sweden:
**Ruotsi**, **Ruoŧŧa**, **Rootsi** and **Roodsi**. It is remarkable
enough that the local Finnic and Permic peoples in northern Russia
proper use the same "Rus'" related name both for Sweden and Russia
(depending on the language): thus the Veps name for Sweden / Swedish is
**Ročinma** / **Ročin**, while in the neighboring Komi language the same
term **Ročmu** / **Roč** means already Russia / Russian instead.

The Danish scholar T.E. Karsten has pointed out that the territory of
present-day Uppland, Södermanland and Östergötland|East Gotland in
ancient times was known as *Roðer* or *roðin*. Thomsen accordingly has
suggested that *Roðer* probably derived from *roðsmenn* or *roðskarlar*,
meaning seafarers or rowers. Ivar Aasen, the Norwegian philologist &
lexicographer, noted Norwegian dialect variants *Rossfolk*, *Rosskar*,
*Rossmann*.

Early evidence
--------------

In Old East Slavic literature, the East Slavs refer to themselves as
"*[muzhi] ruskie*" ("Rus' men") or, rarely, "*rusichi*." The East Slavs
are thought to have adopted this name from the Varangian elite, which
was first mentioned in the 830s in the *Annals of Saint Bertan*. The
*Annals* recount that Holy Roman Emperor Louis II's court at Ingelheim,
in 839 (the same year as the first appearance of Varangians in
Constantinople), was visited by a delegation from the Byzantine emperor.
The delegates included two men who called themselves "***Rhos***"
("*Rhos vocari dicebant*"). Louis inquired about their origins and
learned that they were Swedes. Fearing that they were spies for their
brothers the Danes, he jailed them. They were also mentioned in the 860s
by Byzantine Patriarch Photius under the name, "*Rhos*."

*Rusiyyah* was used by Ibn Fadlan for Varangians near Astrakhan, and by
the Persian traveler Ibn Rustah who visited Novgorod and described how
the **Rus**' exploited the Slavs.

:   As for the Rus, they live on an island ... that takes three days to
    walk round and is covered with thick undergrowth and forests; it is
    most unhealthy... They harry the Slavs, using ships to reach them;
    they carry them off as slaves and... sell them. They have no fields
    but simply live on what they get from the Slav's lands... When a son
    is born, the father will go up to the newborn baby, sword in hand;
    throwing it down, he says, "I shall not leave you with any property:
    You have only what you can provide with this weapon." (Ibn Rustah,
    according to *National Geographic*, March 1985)

When the Varangians arrived in Constantinople, the Byzantines considered
and described the *Rhos* (Greek *Ῥῶς*) as a different people from the
Slavs. In his treatise *De Administrando Imperio*, Constantine VII
describes the Rhos as the neighbours of Pechenegs who buy from the
latter cows, horses, and sheep "because none of these animals may be
found in Rhosia". His description represents the Rus' as a warlike
northern tribe. Constantine also enumerates the names of the Dnieper
cataracts in both *Rhos* and in *Slavic* languages. The Rhos names have
distinct Germanic etymology:

-   Essoupi (Old Norse *vesuppi*, "do not sleep")
-   Oulvorsi (Old Norse *holmfors*, "island rapid")
-   Gelandri (Old Norse *gjallandi*, "yelling, loudly ringing")
-   Aeifor (Old Norse *eiforr*, "ever fierce")
-   Varouforos (Old Norse *varufors*, "cliff rapid" or *barufors*, "wave
    rapid")
-   Leanti (Old Norse *leandi*, "seething", or *hlæjandi*, "laughing")
-   Stroukoun (Old Norse *strukum*, "rapid current").

According to the Primary Chronicle, a historical compilation attributed
to the 12th century, *Rus*' was a group of Varangians who lived on the
other side of the Baltic sea, in Scandinavia. The Varangians were first
expelled, then invited to rule the warring Slavic and Finnic tribes of
Novgorod:

:   The four tribes who had been forced to pay tribute to the Varangians
    - Chuds, Slavs, Merians and Krivichs drove the Varangians back
    beyond the sea, refused to pay them further tribute, and set out to
    govern themselves. But there was no law among them, and tribe rose
    against tribe. Discord thus ensued among them, and they began to war
    one against the other. They said to themselves, "Let us seek a
    prince who may rule over us, and judge us according to custom. Thus
    they went overseas to the Varangians, to the Rus. These particular
    Varangians were known as Rus, just as some are called Swedes, and
    others Normans and Angles, and still others Gotlanders, for they
    were thus named. The Chuds, the Slavs, the Krivichs and the Ves'
    then said to the Rus, "Our land is great and rich, but there is no
    order in it. Come reign as princes, rule over us". Three brothers,
    with their kinfolk, were selected. They brought with them all the
    Rus and migrated.

The earliest written mention of the word *Rus*' or *Rus'ian/Russian*
appears in the Primary Chronicle under the year 912. When describing a
peace treaty signed by Varangian Oleg of Novgorod during his campaign on
Constantinople, it contains the following passage:

:   Oleg sent his men to make peace and sign a treaty between the Greeks
    and the Rus', saying thus: [...] "We are the Rus': Karl, Inegeld,
    Farlaf, Veremud, Rulav, Gudi, Ruald, Karn, Frelav, Ruar, Aktevu,
    Truan, Lidul, Vost, Stemid, sent by Oleg, the great prince of Rus',
    and all those under him, [...]

Quite tellingly, none of the Rus' names listed are Slavic and few are
likely to be Finnic; most or all are Germanic.

Later, the Primary Chronicle tells us, they conquered Kiev and created
Kievan Rus'. The territory they conquered was named after them as were,
eventually, the local people (*cf*. Normans).

However, the Synod Scroll of the Novgorod First Chronicle, which is
partly based on the original list of the late 11th Century and partly on
the Primary Chronicle, does not name the Varangians asked by the Chuds,
Slavs and Krivichs to reign their obstreperous lands as the "Rus'". One
can assume that there was no original mention of the Varangians as the
Rus' due to the old list predating the Primary Chronicle and the Synod
Scroll only referred to the Primary Chronicle if the pages of the old
list were blemished.

Other spellings used in Europe during the 9th and 10th centuries were as
follows: *Ruzi*, *Ruzzi*, *Ruzia* and *Ruzari*. But perhaps the most
popular term to refer to the Rus' was *Rugi*, a name of the ancient East
Germanic tribe related to the Goths. Olga of Kiev, for instance, was
called in the Frankish annals *regina Rugorum*, that is, "the Queen of
the Rugi."

In the 11th century, the dominant term in the Latin tradition was
*Ruscia*. It was used, among others, by Thietmar of Merseburg, Adam of
Bremen, Cosmas of Prague and Pope Gregory VII in his letter to Izyaslav
I. *Rucia*, *Ruzzia*, *Ruzsia* were alternative spellings.

During the 12th century, *Ruscia* gradually made way for two other Latin
terms, *Russia* and *Ruthenia*. *Russia* (also spelled *Rossia* and
*Russie*) was a dominant Romance-language form, first used by Liutprand
of Cremona in the 960s and then by Peter Damiani in the 1030s. It became
ubiquitous in English and French documents in the 12th century.
*Ruthenia*, first documented in the early 12th century Augsburg annals,
was a Latin form preferred by the Papal chancellery (see Ruthenia for
more information).

From Rus' to Russia
-------------------

In modern English historiography, *Kievan Rus*' is the most common name
for the ancient East Slavic state (usually retaining the pedantically
correct apostrophe in *Rus’*, a transliteration of the soft sign, ь)
followed by *Kievan Rus*, *Kievan Russia*, *Ancient Russian state*, and,
extremely rarely, *Kievan Ruthenia*. It is also called the *Princedom*
or *Principality of Kiev*, or just *Kiev*.

But Rus' can mean

-   a small princedom around Kiev, incorporating the cities of Vyshgorod
    and Pereyaslav (roughly within a 200-kilometre radius of Kiev), and
-   a vast political state (of the territories mentioned above) ruled
    first from Novgorod and then from Kiev.

The vast political state was subsequently divided into several parts.
The most influential were, in the south, Halych-Volyn Rus'; and, in the
north, Vladimir-Suzdal Rus' and the Novgorod Republic. The southern part
fell under Catholic Polish influence; the northern part, under much
weaker Mongol influence, went on to become a loose federation of
principalities.

Byzantine hierarchs adopted translations of the names, then politically
imposed by Russia upon the earlier Slavs, directly into the Greek. For
that reason the ancient Kievan Rus' became (*Mikrà Rhōssía*, Russia
Minor or Little Russia), and the newer Russia was referred to by the
name it nominated to give itself: (*Megálē Rhōssía*, Great Russia).
There are claims - from Russian authors - that the names are not of
Slavic origin

By the 15th century, the rulers of the Grand Duchy of Moscow had
reunited the northern parts of the former Kievan Rus'. Ivan III of
Moscow was the first local ruler to become universally recognized under
the title *Grand Duke Of all Rus'|of all Rus’*. This title was used by
the Grand Dukes of Vladimir since early 14th century, and the first
prince to use it was Mikhail Yaroslavich of Tver. Ivan III was styled by
Emperor Maximilian I as and . Later, *Rus’* — in the Russian language
specifically — evolved into the Byzantine-influenced form, *Rossiya*
(Russia is (*Rhōssía*) in Greek).

Differently from other Slavic languages, in the specific case of Russian
language *russkiy* (русский) refers to (and that being a
Russian-specific concept) both the Rus' people and Russians with no
distinction (implying both being the same people with the same language
- see Russification); and *rossiyskiy* (российский), concerning
specifically the Russian people and their state (the latter being the
meaning of "Russian" as understood in the modern English language). In
modern Polish the words being *ruski* (adj. of *Rus' people|Rus’*,
Ruthenian, the older Eastern Slavs from the historic Kievan state) which
may equally refer to modern Belarusians, Ukrainians or both, or in a
historical context to the people of Kievan Rus'|Rus’; contrasted to
*rosyjski* (Russian, native to what became of the Muscovite state, only
indirectly related to the older historical Rus’). Similarly in other
Slavic languages, including modern Ukrainian: *rus’kyy* (руський)
(*Rus’*, Ruthenian), whereas *rosiys’kyy* (російський) refers to
everything belonging to Russia.

### The doubled *S* in *Russia*

In Slavic documents two historic spellings are common, with one or two
letters *s*: *Rosiya* or *Rossiya* (noun), and *ruskiy* or *russkiy*
(adjective). Western languages (,,, ) where the doubled *s* is
necessary for pronunciation with [s] or [ʃ] (one *s* between vowels
representing [z]) all reproduce .

The form of the adjective with *-ss-* reflects Old East Slavic
(*rusĭskŭ*), where *rus-* is a word root (from *Rus’*), *-ĭsk-* is a
suffix, an -*ŭ* is a masculine ending. Although in earlier sources
dating back to Kievan Rus' the spelling with one *s* is most often
found, in modern Russian a double *s* is used. The single-*s* variant
was prevalent in Russian until the end of the 18th century; for example,
the 16th century correspondence between Ivan the Terrible and Prince
Kurbsky constantly uses the single-*s* spelling.

In the 13th century in the Balkans, and then in 14th century Russia, the
literary variant (*Rusiya*) appeared, derived from the old root *Rus’*
with the Latin and Greek suffix *-ia* (-ия). Later, by the mid-17th
century, it was replaced by *Rossiya* with the letter *o* and double
*s*. This form remains in the Balkan languages:,,,,, .

In the Greek language the double sigma appeared for the first time in
the 14th to 15th centuries under the western influence (probably
Venetian or Genovese), although the ancient one-sigma spelling is used
today.

From the 16th century, the Greek variant (*Rossiya*) and the adjective
(*rossiyskiy*) began to be used, but the spelling with one *s* was also
accepted and widely used until the middle of the 18th century, when
Lomonosov wrote his *Grammar* (1755) and finally established the *-ss-*
spelling.

From Rus' to Ukraine
--------------------

Meanwhile the southwestern territories of historical Rus' had been
incorporated into the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (whose full name was
*Grand Duchy of Lithuania, Rus' and Samogitia*). The Grand Duchy of
Lithuania, as a whole, was dominated by Rus', as it was populated mainly
by Rus', many of its nobles were of Rus' origin, and a descendant of the
Old East Slavic language, Ruthenian, is the language of most surviving
official documents prior to 1697 (excluding Polish).

The southern territories dominated by Lithuania have cognate names in
Russian and Polish, respectively:

-   *Belarus* and *Ruś Biała* — White Ruthenia, or White Rus', or
    Belarus;
-   *Chorna Rus* and *Ruś Czarna* — Black Ruthenia, part of modern
    Belarus; and
-   *Chervona Rus* and *Ruś Czerwona* — Red Ruthenia, now a small strip
    in Poland (Przemyśl) and the rest in Ukraine (Galicia). Poland
    called this area the "Ruthenian Voivodeship."
-   *Zelena Rus* - Siberia.
-   *New Rus* - Novorossiya.

While Russian descendants of the Rus' called themselves *Russkiye*, the
residents of *these* lands called themselves *Rusyny* or *Ruskiye*
(Ruthenians).

The word "Ukraine" (*ukraina*) is first recorded in the 15th century
Hypatian Codex of the 12th and 13th century Primary Chronicle, whose
1187 entry on the death of Prince Volodymyr of Pereyaslav (aka
Volodymyr/Vladimir Monomakh) says “The Ukraina groaned for him”, (*o nem
že Ukraina mnogo postona*). The term is also mentioned for the years
1189, 1213, 1280, and 1282 for various East Slavic lands (for example,
Galician Ukrayina, etc.), possibly referring to different principalities
of Kievan Rus' (cf. Skljarenko 1991, Pivtorak 1998) or to different
borderlands (Vasmer 1953-1958, Rudnyc’kyj and Sychynskyj 1949).

In 1654, under the Treaty of Pereyaslav, the Cossack lands of the
Zaporozhian Host were signed into the protectorate of Muscovy, including
the Hetmanate of Left-bank Ukraine, and Zaporozhia. In Russia, these
lands were referred to as Little Russia (*Malorossiya*). Colonies
established in lands ceded from the Ottoman Empire along the Black Sea
were called New Russia (*Novorossiya*).

In the final decades of the 18th century, the Russian Empire, Prussia
and Austria dismembered the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in a series
of partitions, and all of historic Rus', save for Galicia, became part
of the Russian Empire.

During a period of cultural revival after 1840, the members of a secret
ideological society in Kiev, the Brotherhood of Saints Cyril and
Methodius, revived the use of the name *Ukrayina* for the homeland of
the "Little Russian" people. They drew upon a name which had been used
by 17th century Ukrainian Cossacks. It had earlier appeared on 16th
century maps of Kiev and its local area (Kievan Rus'). *Ukrayina* was
originally an Old East Slavic word for a "bordered land" or "a separated
land parcel, a separate part of a tribe's territory", attested as far
back as the 12th century. See *krajina* for cognates.

In the early 20th century, the name *Ukraine* became more widely
accepted, and was used as the official name for the short-lived
Ukrainian People's Republic, West Ukrainian National Republic and
Ukrainian Hetmanate, and for the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Application of the name "Ruthenia" (*Rus*') became narrowed to
Carpathian Ruthenia (*Karpats’ka Rus’*), south of the Carpathian
mountains in the Kingdom of Hungary, where many local Slavs consider
themselves *Rusyns*. Carpathian Ruthenia incorporated the cities of
Mukachiv (Rusyn: *Mukachevo*; ), Uzhhorod  and Prešov (*Pryashiv*; ).
Carpathian Rus' had been part of the Hungarian Kingdom since 907 AD, and
had been known as *Magna Rus* but was also called *Karpato-Rus’* or
*Zakarpattya*.

Alternate Anti-Normanist theories
---------------------------------

A number of alternative etymologies have been suggested. These are
derived from the "anti-Normanist" school of thought in Russian
historiography during the 19th century and in the Soviet era. These
theories are discredited in mainstream academia. Slavic and Iranian
etymologies suggested by "anti-Normanist" scholars include:

-   The Sarmatian of the *Roxolani*, who inhabited southern Ukraine,
    Moldova and Romania (from the Old Persian *rokhs*, meaning light,
    white);
-   One of two rivers in Ukraine, the *Ros* and *Rusna*, near Kiev and
    Pereyaslav, respectively, whose names are derived from a postulated
    Slavic term for "water", akin to *rosa* (dew), *rusalka* (water
    nymph), *ruslo* (stream bed). (Only *rosa* is related to the
    Sanskrit 'rasa'—water, juice, essence—suggests itself.)
-   *Rusiy*
    ([Русый](http://slovari.yandex.ru/art.xml?art=dal/dal/03151/71400.htm&encpage=dal&mrkp=http%3A//hghltd.yandex.com/yandbtm%3Furl%3Dhttp%253A//encycl.yandex.ru/texts/dal/dal/03151/71400.htm%26text%3D%25F0%25F3%25F1%25FB%25E9%26reqtext%3D%25F0%25F3%25F1%25FB%25E9%253A%253A38260%26%26isu%3D2)),
    light-brown, said of hair color (the translation "reddish-haired",
    cognate with the Slavic "ryzhiy", "red-haired", is not quite exact);
-   A postulated proto-Slavic word for "bear", cognate with *arctos* and
    *ursus*.

The name *Rus*' may have originated from the Iranian name of the Volga
River (by F.Knauer Moscow 1901), as well as from the Rosh of Ezekiel.
Prof. George Vernadsky has suggested a derivation from the Roxolani or
from the Aryan term *ronsa* (moisture, water). River names such as Ros
are common in Eastern Europe.

The Russian linguist I.N. Danilevskiy, in his *Ancient Rus as Seen by
Contemporaries and Descendants*, argued against these theories, stating
that the anti-Normanists neglected the realities of the Ancient Slavic
languages and that the nation name *Rus'* could not have arisen from any
of the proposed origins.

-   The populace of the Ros River would have been known as *Roshane*;
-   Red-haired or bear-origined people would have ended their self-name
    with the plural *-ane* or *-ichi*, and not with the singular *-s'*
    (red hair is one of the natural hair colors of Scandinavians and
    other Germanic peoples);
-   Most theories are based on a *Ros-* root, and in Ancient Slavic an
    *o* would never have become the *u* in *Rus'*. But *u* could give
    Russian *o* in step of the ablaut.

Danilevskiy further argued that the term followed the general pattern of
Slavic names for neighboring Uralic peoples—the ''Chud''', ''Ves''',
*Perm*', *Sum*', etc.—but that the only possible word that it could be
based on, *Ruotsi*, presented a historical dead-end, since no such
tribal or national name was known from non-Slavic sources. "Ruotsi" is,
however, the Finnish name for Sweden. But in the old Russian word Serbs
pronounced as the *Serb'*. Danilevskiy shows that the oldest historical
source, the *Primary Chronicle*, is inconsistent in what it refers to as
the "Rus'": in adjacent passages, the Rus' are grouped with Varangians,
with the Slavs, and also set apart from the Slavs and Varangians.
Danilevskiy suggests that the *Rus'* were originally not a nation but a
social class, which can explain the irregularities in the '*'Primary
Chronicle* and the lack of early non-Slavic sources.

See also
--------

-   Name of Ukraine

Footnotes
---------

References
----------

-   "How Rusyns Became Ukrainians", *Zerkalo Nedeli* (*Mirror Weekly*),
    July 2005. Available online [in
    Russian](http://www.zn.ua/3000/3050/50610/) and [in
    Ukrainian](http://www.dt.ua/3000/3050/50610/).
-   "We Are More 'Russian' than Them: a History of Myths and
    Sensations", *Zerkalo Nedeli* (*Mirror Weekly*), January 27 –
    February 2, 2001. Available online [in
    Russian](http://www.zn.ua/3000/3150/29376/) and [in
    Ukrainian](http://www.dt.ua/3000/3150/29376/).
-   "Such a Deceptive Triunity", *Zerkalo Nedeli* (*Mirror Weekly*), May
    2–8, 1998. Available online [in
    Russian](http://www.zn.ua/1000/16665/) and [in
    Ukrainian](http://www.zn.kiev.ua/ie/show/187/16665/).
-   Hakon Stang, *The Naming of Russia* (Oslo: Meddelelser, 1996).
-   Y. M. Suzumov. *Etymology of Rus* (in Appendix to S. Fomin's "Russia
    before the Second Coming", available on-line [in
    Russian](http://www.pravoslavie.by/catal.asp?id=7423&Session=110).)
-   P. Pekarskiy. *Science and Literature in Russia in the Age of Peter
    the Great.* (St Petersburg, 1862)
-   S. M Solovyov. *History of Russia since the Ancient Times*. (Moscow,
    1993)
-   E. Nakonechniy. *The Stolen Name: How the Ruthenians became
    Ukrainians*. (Lviv, 1998)

Category:Country name etymology Category:History of Russia
Category:History of Ukraine Category:Rus
