**Russian cuisine**  is a collection of the different cooking
traditions of the Russian people. The cuisine is diverse, as Russia is
by area the largest country in the world. Russian cuisine derives its
varied character from the vast and multi-cultural expanse of Russia.
Moreover, it is necessary to divide Russian traditional cuisine and
Soviet cuisine, which has its own peculiarity. Its foundations were laid
by the peasant food of the rural population in an often harsh climate,
with a combination of plentiful fish, poultry, game, mushrooms, berries,
and honey. Crops of rye, wheat, barley and millet provided the
ingredients for a plethora of breads, pancakes, cereals, beer and vodka.
Soups and stews full of flavor are centered on seasonal or storable
produce, fish and meats. This wholly native food remained the staple for
the vast majority of Russians well into the 20th century.

Russia's great expansions of culture, influence, and interest during the
16th–18th centuries brought more refined foods and culinary techniques,
as well as one of the most refined food countries in the world. It was
during this period that smoked meats and fish, pastry cooking, salads
and green vegetables, chocolate, ice cream, wines, and juice were
imported from abroad. At least for the urban aristocracy and provincial
gentry, this opened the doors for the creative integration of these new
foodstuffs with traditional Russian dishes. The result is extremely
varied in technique, seasoning, and combination.

Soups
-----

Soups have always played an important role in the Russian meal. The
traditional staple of soups such as borscht (борщ), shchi (щи), ukha
(уха́), rassolnik (рассо́льник), solyanka (соля́нка), botvinya (ботви́нья),
okroshka (окро́шка), and tyurya (тю́ря) was enlarged in the 18th to 20th
centuries by both European and Central Asian staples like clear soups,
pureed soups, stews, and many others.

Russian soups can be divided into at least seven large groups:

-   Chilled soups based on kvass, such as tyurya, okroshka, and
    botvinya.
-   Light soups and stews based on water and vegetables, such as
    swekolnik.
-   Noodle soups with meat, mushrooms, or milk.
-   Soups based on cabbage, most prominently shchi.
-   Thick soups based on meat broth, with a salty-sour base like
    rassolnik and solyanka.
-   Fish soups such as ukha.
-   Grain- and vegetable-based soups.

### Cold soups

Okroshka is a cold soup based on kvass or sour milk. Okroshka is also a
salad. The main ingredients are two types of vegetables that can be
mixed with cold boiled meat or fish in a 1:1 proportion . Thus
vegetable, meat, poultry, and fish varieties of okroshka are made.

There are typically two types of vegetables in okroshka. The first must
have a neutral taste, such as boiled potatoes, turnips, rutabagas,
carrots, or fresh cucumbers. The second must be spicy, consisting of
mainly green onion as well as other herbs—greens of
dill,parsley,chervil, celery, or tarragon. Different meat and poultry
can be used in the same soup. The most common ingredient is beef alone
or with poultry. If it is made with fish, the best choice would be
tench, European perch, pike-perch, cod, or other neutral-tasting fish.

The kvass most commonly used in cooking is white okroshka kvass, which
is much more sour than drinking kvass. Kvass is also very sweet. Spices
used include mustard, black pepper and pickled cucumber (specifically,
the liquid from the pickles), solely or in combination. For the final
touch, boiled eggs and smetana (similar to crème fraîche) are added.

For sour milk based okroshka, well shaken up natural sour milk(often
with the addition of seed oil) is used with the addition of pure water
and ground garlic. Sometimes manufactured kefir is used instead of
natural sour milk for time saving reasons, though some say it detracts
from the original taste of okroshka.

**Tyurya** is very similar to okroshka, the main difference being that
instead of vegetables, bread is soaked in kvass. It is was commonly
consumed during rough times (the Russian Revolution, World War I, World
War II) and by poor peasants. Also, due to its simplicity, it was very
common as a meal during religious fasting.

**Botvinya** is another type of cold soup. The name of the soup comes
from the Russian word *botva*, which means "leafy tops of root
vegetables", and, true to its name, it is made with the leafy tops of
young beets, sorrel, scallions, dill, cucumbers, and two types of kvass.
Mustard, garlic, and horseradish are then added for flavor. The
vegetables are rubbed through a sieve and kvass is poured over.

### Hot soups

**Shchi** (cabbage soup) had been the predominant first course in
Russian cuisine for over a thousand years. Although tastes have changed,
it steadily made its way through several epochs. Shchi knew no social
class boundaries, and even if the rich had richer ingredients and the
poor made it solely of cabbage and onions, all these "poor" and "rich"
variations were cooked in the same tradition. The unique taste of this
cabbage soup was from the fact that after cooking it was left to draw
(stew) in a Russian stove. The "Spirit of shchi" was inseparable from a
Russian izba (log hut). Many Russian proverbs are connected to this
soup, such as *Shchi da kasha pishcha nasha* (, "Shchi and porridge are
our staples"). It can be eaten regularly, and at any time of the year.

The richer variant of shchi includes several ingredients, but the first
and last components are a must:

1.  Cabbage.
2.  Meat (very rarely fish or mushrooms).
3.  Carrots, basil or parsley roots.
4.  Spicy herbs (onions, celery, dill, garlic, pepper, bay leaf).
5.  Sour components (smetana, apples, sauerkraut, pickle water).

When this soup is served, smetana is added. It is eaten with rye bread.
During much of the year when the Orthodox Christian Church prescribes
abstinence from meat and dairy, a vegan version of shchi is made.
"Kislye" (sour) schi are made from pickled cabbage (sauerkraut), "serye"
(grey) schi from the green outer leaves of the cabbage head. "Zelyonye"
(green) schi are made from sorrel leaves, not cabbage, and used to be a
popular summer soup.

**Ukha** is a warm watery fish dish, however calling it a fish soup
would not be absolutely correct. "Ukha" as a name for fish broth was
established only in the late 17th to early 18th centuries. In earlier
times this name was first given to thick meat broths, and then later
chicken. Beginning from the 15th century, fish was more and more often
used to prepare ukha, thus creating a dish that had a distinctive taste
among soups.

A minimum of vegetables is added in preparation, and in classical
cooking ukha was simply a rich fish broth served to accompany fish pies
(rasstegai, kuliebiaka, etc.). These days it is more often a fish soup,
cooked with potatoes and other vegetables. A wide variety of freshwater
fish is traditionally used.

**Rassolnik** is a hot soup in a salty-sour cucumber base. This dish
formed in Russian cuisine quite late—only in the 19th century. About
this time the name rassolnik was attached to it, originating from the
Russian word *rassol* which means "brine (food)" (pickle water). Pickle
water was known to be used as base for soups from the 15th century at
the latest. Its concentration and ratio with other liquids and soup
components gave birth to different soups: solyanka, shchi, and of course
rassolnik. The latest are moderately sour-salty soups on pickled
cucumber base. Some are vegetarian, but more often with products like
veal or beef kidneys or all poultry giblets (stomach, liver, heart,
neck, feet). For best taste there has to be a balance between the sour
part and neutral absorbers (cereals, potatoes, root vegetables). Typical
rassolnik is based on kidneys, brine (and pickles), vegetables and
barley.

**Kal'ya** was a very common dish first served in the 16th–17th
centuries. Subsequently it almost completely disappeared from Russian
cuisine. Often it was incorrectly called "fish rassolnik". The cooking
technique is mostly the same as of ukha, but to the broth were added
pickled cucumbers, pickle water, lemons and lemon juice, either
separately or all together. The main characteristic of kal'ya is that
only fat, rich fish was used; sometimes caviar was added along with the
fish. More spices are added, and the soup turns out more piquant and
thicker than ukha. Formerly kal'ya was considered a festivity dish.

Image:Soljanka with olives.jpg|thumb|Solyanka **Solyanka** is a thick,
piquant soup that combines components from shchi (cabbage, smetana) and
rassolnik (pickle water and cucumbers), spices such as olives, capers,
tomatoes, lemons, lemon juice, kvass, salted and pickled mushrooms make
up a considerably strong sour-salty base of the soup. Solyanka is much
thicker than other soups, about 1/3 less liquid ratio. Three types are
distinguished: meat, fish, and simple solyanka. The first two are cooked
on strong meat or fish broths, and the last on mushroom or vegetable
broth. All the broths are mixed with cucumber pickle water.

**Lapsha** (noodle soup) was adopted by Russians from Tatars, and after
some transformation became widespread in Russia. It comes in three
variations: chicken, mushroom, and milk. Cooking all three is simple,
including preparation of noodles, cooking of corresponding broth, and
boiling of noodles in broth. Noodles are based on the same wheat flour
or buckwheat/wheat flour mix. Mixed flour noodles go better with
mushroom or milk broth.

Main dishes
-----------

### Meat

In traditional Russian cuisine three basic variations of meat dishes can
be highlighted:

-   a large boiled piece of meat cooked in a soup or porridge, and then
    used as second course or served cold (particularly in jellied
    stock—see **Kholodets**' below)
-   offal dishes (liver, tripe, etc.), baked in pots together with
    cereals;
-   whole fowl dishes or parts of fowl (legs or breasts), or a large
    piece of meat (rump) baked on a baking tray in an oven, so-called
    "zharkoye" (from the word "zhar"(жар) meaning "heat")

The 16th century "Domostroi" aimed at affluent households also mentions
sausage-making, spit-roasted meats, stews and many other meat dishes.

As a garnish to meat dishes in the past the most common were porridges
and cereals, in which the meat was boiled, later on boiled or rather
steamed and baked root vegetables (turnips, carrots) as well as
mushrooms; additionally the meat, without taking account its type, was
garnished with pickled products—pickled cabbage, sour and "soaked"
(marinated) apples (mochoniye yabloki), soaked cranberries, "vzvar"s.
Pan juices, alone or mixed with sour cream or melted butter is used as
gravy to pour on garnishing vegetables and porridges. Meat sauces i.e.
gravies based on flour, butter, eggs and milk, are not common for
traditional Russian cuisine.

**Kholodets (or Studen')**: Jellied chopped pieces of pork or veal meat
with some spices added (pepper, parsley, garlic, bay leaf) and minor
amounts of vegetables (carrots, onions). The meat is boiled in large
pieces for long periods of time, then chopped, boiled a few times again
and finally chilled for 3–4 hours (hence the name) forming a jelly mass,
though gelatine is not used because calves' feet, pigs' heads and other
such offal is gelatinous enough on its own. It is served with
horseradish, mustard, or ground garlic with smetana.

**Pelmeni** (пельмени in Russian, singular pelmen, пельмень; пяльмені in
Belarusian) are a traditional Eastern European (mainly Russian) dish
usually made with minced meat filling, wrapped in thin dough (made out
of flour and eggs, sometimes with milk or water added). For filling,
pork, lamb, beef, or any other kind of meat can be used; mixing several
kinds is popular. The traditional Ural recipe requires the filling be
made with 45% of beef, 35% of lamb, and 20% of pork. Traditionally,
various spices, such as pepper, onions, and garlic, are mixed into the
filling.

Russians seem to have learned to make pelmeni from Finnic and Tatar
peoples of the Taiga, the Urals and Siberia. The word means "ear-shaped
bread" in Finnic languages such as Udmurt and Komi. In Siberia they were
made in large quantities and stored safely frozen outside for several
winter months. In mainland Russia, the term "Siberian Pel'meni" refers
to pel'meni made with a mix of meats (whether the 45/35/20 mix mentioned
above, or another ratio), rather than a single meat. By the late 19th
century, they became a staple throughout urban European Russia. They are
prepared immediately before eating by boiling in water until they float,
and then 2–5 minutes more. The resulting dish is served with butter
and/or sour cream (mustard, horseradish, and vinegar are popular as
well). Some recipes suggest frying pelmeni after boiling until they turn
golden brown.

Pelmeni belong to the family of dumplings. Akin to vareniki: Ukrainian
variety of dumplings with filling made of mashed potatoes, farmer's
cheese, or cherries, to mention the most popular three. They are not
dissimilar to Chinese potstickers, Tibetan mo-mo and Italian ravioli, as
well as the Manti of the Kazakh and Kyrgyz cultures. The main difference
between pelmeni and other kinds of dumplings is in their shape and size
— the typical pelmen' is roughly spherical and is about 2 to 3 cm in
diameter, whereas most other types of dumplings are usually elongated
and much larger.

The process of making pelmeni is somewhat labor-intensive, but a device
known as "pelmennitsa" greatly speeds up the task. It consists of a
typically round aluminum plate with a matrix of holes surrounded by
ridges. A sheet of dough is placed over the matrix, filling is scooped
into each "cell", and the dough sags under the weight of the filling,
forming the body of the dumpling. Another sheet of dough is placed on
top, and a wooden roller is rolled over the top, pressing the dough
layers together, cutting the dumplings apart by the ridges, and forcing
the dumplings to fall through the holes. Using a pelmennitsa, the chef
can quickly manufacture batches of dumplings at a time.

Various minced meat dishes were adopted from other cuisines and became
popular only in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; for traditional
Russian cuisine they are not typical.

**Kotlety** (minced cutlets, meatballs), a Western European dish popular
in modern Russian households, are small pan-fried meat balls, not
dissimilar from Salisbury steak and other such dishes. Made primarily
from pork and beef (sometimes also from chicken or fish), they are
easily made and require little time. Ground beef, pork, onions and bread
are put in a bowl and mixed thoroughly until it becomes relatively
consistent. Once this effect is achieved, balls are formed and then put
into a hot frying pan to cook.

**Shashlyk** is a form of Shish kebab (marinated meat grilled on a
skewer) popular in former Soviet Union countries, notably in Georgia,
Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Uzbekistan. It often features
alternating slices of meat and onions. Even though the word "shashlyk"
was apparently borrowed from the Crimean Tatars by the Cossacks as early
as the 16th century, kebabs did not reach Moscow until the late 19th
century, according to Vladimir Gilyarovsky's "Moscow and Moscovites".
From then on, their popularity spread rapidly; by the 1910s they were a
staple in St Petersburg restaurants and by the 1920s they were already a
pervasive street food all over urban Russia. Shashlik is also used in
Russia as a food to be cooked in outdoor environment, similarly to
barbecue in English-speaking countries.

### Fish

Fish was important in pre-revolutionary cuisine, especially on Russian
Orthodox fast days when meat was forbidden, similar to the Catholic
custom of eating fish instead of meat on Fridays. Strictly freshwater
fish such as carp and sudak (Sander lucioperca, Zander) were commonly
eaten in inland areas, as well as anadromous sturgeon and in northern
areas salmon, pike and trout. A greater variety of fish—including
saltwater species—were preserved by salting, pickling or smoking and
consumed as "zakuski" (hors d'oeuvres).

### Pies and pancakes

Image:Piroshki.JPG|thumb|Russian pirozhki made with onion, mushroom,
meat and rice stuffing. **Pirozhki** (singular: pirozhok; diminutive of
"pirog" [pie]) are small stuffed buns (pies) made of either yeast dough
or short pastry. They are filled with one of many different fillings and
are either baked (the ancient Slavic method) or shallow-fried (known as
"priazhenie", this method was borrowed from the Tatars in the 16th
century). One feature of pirozhki that sets them apart from, for
example, English pies is that the fillings used are almost invariably
fully cooked. The use of chopped hard-boiled eggs in fillings is another
interesting feature. Six typical fillings for traditional pirozhki are:

1.  Chopped boiled meat mixed with sautéed onions
2.  Rice and boiled eggs with dill
3.  Fish sautéed with onions and mixed with hard-boiled chopped eggs and
    rice
4.  Mashed potatoes mixed with dill and green onion
5.  Sautéed cabbage
6.  Sautéed mushrooms with onions and sometimes carrots

Image:RusSyrnikiKissel.JPG|thumb|Russian Syrniki with Kissel. **Blini**
are thin pancakes made with yeasted batter which are often served in
connection with a religious rite or festival. The word "blin" (singular
of blini) comes from Old Slavic "mlin", which means "to mill". Blins had
a somewhat ritual significance for early Slavic peoples in pre-Christian
times since they were a symbol of the sun, due to their round form. They
were traditionally prepared at the end of the winter to honor the
rebirth of the new sun during Maslenitsa (Масленица, Butter Week; also
known as Pancake Week). This tradition was adopted by the Orthodox
Church and is carried on to the present day, as the last week of dairy
and egg products before Lent. Bliny are still often served at wakes, to
commemorate the recently deceased. Blini can be made from wheat,
buckwheat, or other grains, although wheat blini are most popular in
Russia. They may be topped with butter, smetana (sour cream), fruit
preserves or caviar. The word "blin" is also often used as a soft curse
word, expressing frustration.

**Syrniki** are fried curd fritters, garnished with sour cream, jam,
honey, and/or apple sauce.

**Vatrushka** is a kind of cake with a ring of dough and tvorog (cottage
cheese) in the middle, often with raisins or bits of fruit, from about
five inches to two and a half feet in diameter.

### Vegetables

Cabbage, potatoes, and cold tolerant greens are common in Russian and
other Eastern European cuisines. Pickling cabbage, cucumbers, rutabagas
and other vegetables in brine is used to preserve vegetables for winter
use. Pickled apples and some other fruit also used to be widely popular.
These are sources of vitamins during periods when fresh fruit and
vegetables are traditionally not available.

Beverages
---------

Many traditional drinks are indigenous to Russia and are not present in
other national cuisines. The most notable of these are vodka, sbiten',
kvass, medovukha and mors. Many of them are no longer common and have
been replaced by drinks originating in Europe. Nonetheless, these
beverages were formerly drunk as a compliment to meat and poultry
dishes, sweet porridge, and dessert. Of particular note is sbiten, an
immensely popular medieval drink which has since been replaced by tea as
the Russian mainstay beverage.

### Alcoholic

Of Russia's alcoholic beverages, perhaps the most ancient is Medovukha,
a sweet, low-alcohol drink, made with fermented-honey with the addition
of various spices. A stronger honey-based beverage, **stavlenniy myod**,
also exists in Russia and is broadly equivalent to Scandinavian mead; it
is typically made with the admixture of berry juices.

Vodka is the most well-known of Russia's alcoholic products and is
produced, with some variation, throughout the country. Vodka can be
either grain or potato based and is frequently flavored with a great
variety of ingredients ranging from hot-pepper and horseradish to fruits
and berries.

Beer has been manufactured in Russia since at the very least the 9th
century. Its popularity was for many centuries concentrated in the Lands
of Novgorod. Beer continued to be made throughout Russian history, but
real growth came in the 18th century when many breweries were founded in
order to supply the newly modernized and expanded imperial army and
fleet. A real explosion in the popularity of beer came in the last
decades of the Soviet Era and has continued into the present day, with
Russia now ranking as the fourth largest producer in the world.

Wine is manufactured in the southern regions in the country, but lags
far behind other alcoholic beverages in popularity. The wine industry,
which was somewhat notable in imperial times, is slowly expanding, but
most Russians that drink wine tend to prefer imported foreign varieties,
especially sweet varieties produced in the countries of the former USSR
and little known in the outside world.

### Non-alcoholic

Image:Mint bread kvas.jpg|thumb|247px|Kvass is a bread-based drink and a
key ingredient in many soups.

Kvass is an ancient and still widely popular bread-based drink. The
basic method of preparing kvass includes water, flour and liquid malt;
these ingredients are used to make a dough that is subjected to
fermentation. This results in a beverage with very low alcohol content.
Commercial kvas is often around 0.5% alcohol. The fermented liquid,
referred to as "zator," is diluted with water and mixed with yeast,
sugar, and aromatic additives. This final mixture is allowed to brew for
several days. Flavor additives may include fruit and berry juices
(cherry, raspberry, lemon, etc.), as well as ginger and mint.

Sbiten, another non-alcoholic drink, is made of honey, water, fruit
juices, and spices. Sbiten was once the most popular non-alcoholic
beverage in the country, but in the last few centuries it has been
superseded and largely replaced by tea and coffee.

Another popular drink is mors, which is made of sweetened fruit juices
diluted with water.

Tea is by far the most common drink in almost all parts of Russia. First
introduced from China in the 17th century, its popularity has since
spread throughout the country. Black tea has always been the dominant
variety, but after the Russian acquisition of Central Asia, awareness of
and interest in green tea began to increase slowly. Today Russia remains
one of the largest tea consumers in the world. Russian Caravan is
perhaps the most well known type of Russian tea around the world.

Until the Sino-Soviet split, tea was brought mostly in China. Now,
Russia imports most of its tea from India and Sri Lanka, with Darjeeling
being the most prized variety. Domestic cultivation exists in the
southern regions of the country (mostly in Krasnodar Krai), but local
supply is very limited compared to national consumption.

Coffee is also popular but has never caught up to tea in popularity.
Peter the Great is credited with introducing coffee to Russia, with the
drink becoming steadily more pervasive since that time. Coffee is
commonly made either using the Turkish or common European methods.

Salads and other foods
----------------------

-   Olivier salad (also known as Russian salad), a mayonnaise-based
    potato salad distinguished by its diced texture and the contrasting
    flavors of pickles, hard-boiled eggs, and peas.
-   *Sel'd' pod shuboy* (or *Shuba*, from Russian *шуба* (fur coat)),
    also known as "dressed herring", is chopped salted herring under a
    "coat" of shredded cooked beet, sometimes with a layer of egg or
    other vegetables
-   Vinegret (from French *vinaigrette*), a salad made of boiled beets,
    potatoes, carrots, pickles, onions, sauerkraut, and sometimes peas
    or white beans.
-   Varenye, a dessert and condiment made from cooking berries. It is
    similar to jam except the fruit is not macerated and the consistency
    is more akin to fruit within syrup. It is used as a topping for
    crepes and syrniki and as a sweetener for tea. It is also eaten on
    its own as a sweet.

