\
 Российская Империя}}\
 *Rossiyskaya Imperiya*}}

</div>
|common\_name = Russia |continent = Eurasia |status = Empire
|year\_start = 1721 |year\_end = 1917 |image\_flag = Flag of Russia.svg
|flag\_type = Flag |image\_coat = Lesser CoA of the empire of
Russia.svg|105px|Lesser CoA of the empire of Russia |symbol = Coat of
arms of Russia |symbol\_type = Coat of arms |national\_motto = Gott mit
uns|*"S nami Bog!"*\
Съ нами Богъ!\
|national\_anthem = *none*

<div style="padding:0.5em 0.25em 0.3em;">
**Imperial anthem**\
Bozhe, Tsarya khrani!|*Bozhe, Tsarya khrani!*\
Боже, Царя храни!\

</div>
|image\_map = Russian Empire in 1866.png |image\_map\_caption = The
Russian Empire at its greatest extent in 1866

<div style="padding:0.5em 0.5em 0.25em 8.0em;text-align:left;font-size:115%;">
^\#inforefa|[a]^}}

</div>
|capital = | Moscow | St. Petersburg^\#inforefb|[b]^}} }} |latd=59
|latm=56 |latNS=N |longd=30 |longm=20 |longEW=E |common\_languages =
Official\
Russian }} |religion = Official\
Russian Orthodox }} |government\_type = constitutional from 1906)}} }}
|title\_leader = Emperor |leader1 = Peter I |year\_leader1 = }} |leader2
= Nicholas II |year\_leader2 = }} |title\_deputy = |deputy1 = Sergei
Witte |year\_deputy1 = }} |deputy2 = Nikolai Golitsyn |year\_deputy2 =
1917 |legislature =

<div style="font-size:95%;white-space:nowrap;">
Emperor exercises legislative\
power in conjunction with the\
}}

</div>
|house1 = State Council |house2 = State Duma |event\_pre = Accession of
Peter I |date\_pre = ^\#inforefc|[c]^}} |event\_start = Empire
proclaimed |date\_start = }} |event1 = Decembrist revolt |date\_event1 =
1825}} |event2 = |date\_event2 = 1861}} |event3 = 1905 Revolution
|date\_event3 = Jan–Dec 1905 |event4 = |date\_event4 = 1906}}
|event\_end = February Revolution |date\_end = }} |event\_post = October
Revolution |date\_post = 1917}} |stat\_year1=1866 |stat\_area1=22800000
|stat\_year2=1916 |stat\_area2=21799825 |stat\_year3=1916 |stat\_area3=
|stat\_pop3=181,537,800 |currency = Ruble |p1=Tsardom of Russia
|flag\_p1=Flag of Russia.svg |s1=Russian Republic |flag\_s1=Flag of
Russia.svg |s2=Ober Ost |flag\_s2=Flag of the German Empire.svg
|s3=Karafuto Prefecture |flag\_s3=Merchant flag of Japan (1870).svg
|s4=Department of Alaska |flag\_s4=Flag of the United States.svg
|s5=Mountainous Republic of the Northern Caucasus |flag\_s5=Flag of the
Mountainous Republic of the Northern Caucasus.svg |s6=State of
Buryat-Mongolia |flag\_s6=Flag of Mongolia (1911-1921).svg |today = }}
|footnotes =

`a. `**`#infoa|^`**` After 1866, Alaska was sold to the United States, but Batum, Kars, Pamir and Transcaspia were acquired.}}`\
` | b. `**`#infob|^`**` Renamed Petrograd in 1914.`\
` |  }}`\
`}}`

}}

The **Russian Empire** (Pre-reform Russian orthography: Россійская
Имперія, Modern Russian: Российская империя, translit: *Rossiyskaya
Imperiya*) was a state that existed from 1721 until overthrown by a
liberal February Revolution in 1917. One of the largest empires in world
history, stretching over three continents, the Russian Empire was
surpassed in landmass only by the British and Mongol empires. It played
a major role in 1812–14 in defeating Napoleon's ambitions to control
Europe, and expanded to the west and south. It was often in conflict
with the Ottoman Empire (which in turn was usually protected by the
British).

At the beginning of the 19th century, it extended from the Arctic Ocean
in the north to the Black Sea on the south, from the Baltic Sea on the
west to the Pacific Ocean, and (until 1867) into Alaska in North America
on the east. With 125.6 million subjects registered by the 1897 census,
it had the third largest population in the world at the time, after Qing
China and the British Empire. Like all empires, it included a large
disparity in terms of economics, ethnicity, and religion. There were
numerous dissident elements, who launched numerous rebellions and
assassination attempts; they were closely watched by the secret police,
with thousands exiled to Siberia. Economically it was heavily rural with
low productivity on large estates worked by serfs, until they were freed
in 1863. The economy slowly industrialized with the help of foreign
investments in railways and factories. The land was ruled by a nobility
called Boyars from the 10th through the 17th centuries, and then was
ruled by an Emperor of All Russia|emperor called the "Tsar". Tsar Ivan
III (1462 – 1505) laid the groundwork for the empire that later emerged.
He tripled the territory of his state, ended the dominance of the Golden
Horde, renovated the Moscow Kremlin, and laid the foundations of the
Russian state. Tsar Peter the Great (1682 - 1725) fought numerous wars
and built a huge empire that became a major European power. He moved the
capital from Moscow to the new model city of St. Petersburg, and led a
cultural revolution that replaced some of the traditionalist and
medieval social and political system with a modern, scientific,
Europe-oriented, and rationalist system. Catherine the Great (1761 -
1796) presided over a golden age. She expanded the nation rapidly by
conquest, colonization and diplomacy. She continued Peter the Great's
policy of modernisation along West European lines. Tsar Alexander II
(1855 - 1881) promoted numerous reforms, most dramatically the
emancipation of all 23 million serfs in 1861. His policy in Eastern
Europe was to protect the Orthodox Christians under the rule of the
Ottoman Empire. That involvement by 1914 led to Russia's entry into the
First World War on the side of Serbia and the Allies, and against the
German, Austrian and Ottoman empires. Russia was an absolute monarchy
until the Revolution of 1905 and then became a constitutional monarchy.
The empire collapsed during the February Revolution of 1917, the result
of massive failures in its participation in the Great War.

History
-------

Though the Empire was only officially proclaimed by Tsar Peter I,
following the Treaty of Nystad (1721), some historians would argue that
it was truly born either when Ivan III conquered Novgorod or when Ivan
IV conquered Kazan. According to another point of view, the term
*Tsardom* (Царство), which was used after the coronation of Ivan IV in
1547, was already a contemporary Russian word for empire, while Peter
the Great just replaced it with a Latinized synonym. Perhaps the latter
was done to make Europe recognize Russia as more of a European country.

Much of Russia's expansion occurred in the 17th century, culminating in
the first Russian settlement of the Pacific in the mid-17th century, the
incorporation of Left-bank Ukraine and the pacification of the Siberian
tribes.

### Eighteenth century

Peter I the Great (1672–1725) introduced autocracy in Russia and played
a major role in introducing his country to the European state system.
However, this vast land had a population of 14 million. Grain yields
trailed behind those of agriculture in the West, compelling nearly the
entire population to farm. Only a small percentage lived in towns. The
class of kholops, close to the one of slavery, remained a major
institution in Russia until 1723, when Peter I converted household
kholops into house serfs, thus including them in poll taxation. Russian
agricultural kholops were formally converted into serfs earlier in 1679.

Peter's first military efforts were directed against the Ottoman Turks.
His attention then turned to the North. Peter still lacked a secure
northern seaport, except at Archangel on the White Sea, but the harbor
there was frozen for nine months a year. Access to the Baltic was
blocked by Sweden, whose territory enclosed it on three sides. Peter's
ambitions for a "window to the sea" led him to make a secret alliance
with Saxony in 1699, the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and Denmark
against Sweden, resulting in the Great Northern War. The war ended in
1721 when an exhausted Sweden asked for peace with Russia. Peter
acquired four provinces situated south and east of the Gulf of Finland.
The coveted access to the sea was now secured. There he built Russia's
new capital, Saint Petersburg, to replace Moscow, which had long been
Russia's cultural center.

Peter reorganized his government based on the latest political models of
the time, moulding Russia into an absolutist state. He replaced the old
*boyar* Duma (council of nobles) with a nine-member Senate, in effect a
supreme council of state. The countryside was also divided into new
provinces and districts. Peter told the Senate that its mission was to
collect tax revenues. In turn tax revenues tripled over the course of
his reign. As part of the government reform, the Orthodox Church was
partially incorporated into the country's administrative structure, in
effect making it a tool of the state. Peter abolished the patriarchate
and replaced it with a collective body, the Holy Synod, led by a
government official. Meanwhile, all vestiges of local self-government
were removed. Peter continued and intensified his predecessors'
requirement of state service for all nobles.

Peter died in 1725, leaving an unsettled succession. After a short reign
of his wife Catherine I, the crown passed to empress Anna who slowed
down the reforms and led a successful war against the Ottoman Empire,
which brought a significant weakening of the Ottoman vassal Crimean
Khanate, a long-term Russian adversary.

The discontent over the dominant positions of Baltic Germans in Russian
politics brought Peter I's daughter Elizabeth on the Russian throne.
Elizabeth supported the arts, architecture and the sciences (for example
with the foundation of the Moscow University). However, she did not
carry out significant structural reforms. Her reign, which lasted nearly
20 years, is also known for her involvement in the Seven Years' War. It
was successful for Russia militarily, but fruitless politically.

Catherine II, the Great, was a German princess who married Peter III,
the German heir to the Russian crown. After the death of Empress
Elisabeth she came to power, when her coup d'état against her unpopular
pro-Prussian husband succeeded. She contributed to the resurgence of the
Russian nobility that began after the death of Peter the Great. State
service was abolished, and Catherine delighted the nobles further by
turning over most state functions in the provinces to them.

Catherine the Great extended Russian political control over the lands of
the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. Her actions included the support of
the Targowica Confederation, although the cost of her campaigns, on top
of the oppressive social system that required serfs to spend almost all
of their time laboring on their owners' land, provoked a major peasant
uprising in 1773, after Catherine legalised the selling of serfs
separate from land. Inspired by a Cossack named Pugachev, with the
emphatic cry of "Hang all the landlords!", the rebels threatened to take
Moscow before they were ruthlessly suppressed. Instead of the
traditional punishment of being drawn and quartered, Catherine issued
secret instructions that the executioner should carry the sentence out
quickly and with a minimum of suffering, as part of her effort to
introduce compassion into the law. She also ordered the public trial of
Darya Nikolayevna Saltykova, a member of the highest nobility, on
charges of torture and murder. These gestures of compassion garnered
Catherine much positive attention from Europe experiencing the
Enlightenment age, but the specter of revolution and disorder continued
to haunt her and her successors.

In order to ensure continued support from the nobility, which was
essential to the survival of her government, Catherine was obliged to
strengthen their authority and power at the expense of the serfs and
other lower classes. Nevertheless, Catherine realized that serfdom must
be ended, going so far in her "Nakaz" ("Instruction") to say that serfs
were "just as good as we are" – a comment the nobility received with
disgust. Documents were also found after Catherine's death that showed
she hoped to introduce a form of parliamentary democracy in Russia, but
realized the empire was not yet ready for such a move, particularly due
to the problem of serfdom. Catherine successfully waged war against the
Ottoman Empire and advanced Russia's southern boundary to the Black Sea.
Then, by plotting with the rulers of Austria and Prussia, she
incorporated territories of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth during
the Partitions of Poland, pushing the Russian frontier westward into
Central Europe. By the time of her death in 1796, Catherine's
expansionist policy had turned Russia into a major European power. This
continued with Alexander I's wresting of Finland from the weakened
kingdom of Sweden in 1809 and of Bessarabia from the Principality of
Moldavia, ceded by the Ottomans in 1812.

### First half of the nineteenth century

Napoleon made a major mistake when, following a dispute with Tsar
Alexander I, he launched an invasion of the tsar's realm in 1812. The
campaign was a catastrophe. Although Napoleon's Grande Armée made its
way to Moscow, the Russians' scorched-earth strategy prevented the
invaders from living off the country. In the bitterly cold Russian
weather, thousands of French troops were ambushed and killed by peasant
guerrilla fighters. As Napoleon's forces retreated, the Russian troops
pursued them into Central and Western Europe and to the gates of Paris.
After Russia and its allies defeated Napoleon, Alexander became known as
the 'savior of Europe,' and he presided over the redrawing of the map of
Europe at the Congress of Vienna (1815), that ultimately made Alexander
the monarch of Congress Poland.

Although the Russian Empire would play a leading political role in the
next century, thanks to its defeat of Napoleonic France, its retention
of serfdom precluded economic progress of any significant degree. As
West European economic growth accelerated during the Industrial
Revolution, which had begun in the second half of the 18th century,
Russia began to lag ever farther behind, creating new problems for the
Empire as a great power. This status concealed the inefficiency of its
government, the isolation of its people, and its economic backwardness.
Following the defeat of Napoleon, Alexander I had been ready to discuss
constitutional reforms, but though a few were introduced, no major
changes were attempted.

The liberal Tsar was replaced by his younger brother, Nicholas I
(1825–1855), who at the beginning of his reign was confronted with an
uprising. The background of this revolt lay in the Napoleonic Wars, when
a number of well-educated Russian officers traveled in Europe in the
course of military campaigns, where their exposure to the liberalism of
Western Europe encouraged them to seek change on their return to
autocratic Russia. The result was the Decembrist revolt (December 1825),
the work of a small circle of liberal nobles and army officers who
wanted to install Nicholas' brother as a constitutional monarch. But the
revolt was easily crushed, leading Nicholas to turn away from the
modernization program begun by Peter the Great and champion the doctrine
of Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality.

The retaliation for the revolt made "December Fourteenth" a day long
remembered by later revolutionary movements. In order to repress further
revolts, censorship was intensified, including the constant surveillance
of schools and universities. Textbooks were strictly regulated by the
government. Police spies were planted everywhere. Would-be
revolutionaries were sent off to Siberia - under Nicholas I hundreds of
thousands were sent to katorga there.

After the Russian armies liberated allied Georgia from Persian
occupation in 1802, they clashed with Persia over control of Azerbaijan
and got involved in the Caucasian War against the Caucasian Imamate.
Russian tsars also had to deal with two uprisings in their newly
acquired territories of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth: the November
Uprising in 1830 and the January Uprising in 1863.

The question of Russia's direction had been gaining attention ever since
Peter the Great's program of modernization. Some favored imitating
Western Europe while others were against this and called for a return of
the traditions of the past. The latter path was advocated by
Slavophiles, who held the "decadent" West in contempt. The Slavophiles
were opponents of bureaucracy who preferred the collectivism of the
mediaeval Russian *mir*, or village community, to the individualism of
the West. Alternative social doctrines were elaborated by such Russian
radicals as Alexander Herzen, Mikhail Bakunin, and Peter Kropotkin.

### Second half of the nineteenth century

Tsar Nicholas died with his philosophy being heavily disputed. One year
earlier, Russia had become involved in the Crimean War, a conflict
fought primarily in the Crimean peninsula. Since playing a major role in
the defeat of Napoleon, Russia had been regarded as militarily
invincible, but, once opposed against a coalition of the great powers of
Europe, the reverses it suffered on land and sea exposed the decay and
weakness of Tsar Nicholas' regime.

When Alexander II ascended the throne in 1855, desire for reform was
widespread among the populace. A growing humanitarian movement, which in
later years has been compared to that of the abolitionists in the United
States before the American Civil War, attacked serfdom. In 1859, there
were more than 23 million serfs living under conditions worse than those
of the peasants of western Europe on 16th-century manors. Alexander II
made up his own mind to abolish serfdom from above, rather than wait for
it to be abolished from below in a revolutionary way.

The emancipation of the serfs in 1861 was the single most important
event in 19th-century Russian history. It was the beginning of the end
for the landed aristocracy's monopoly of power. Emancipation brought a
supply of free labor to the cities, industry was stimulated, and the
middle class grew in number and influence. However, instead of receiving
their lands as a gift, the freed peasants had to pay a special tax for
what amounted to their lifetime to the government, which in turn paid
the landlords a generous price for the land that they had lost. In
numerous cases the peasants ended up with the smallest amount of land.
All the property turned over to the peasants was owned collectively by
the *mir*, the village community, which divided the land among the
peasants and supervised the various holdings. Although serfdom was
abolished, since its abolition was achieved on terms unfavorable to the
peasants, revolutionary tensions were not abated, despite Alexander II's
intentions. Revolutionaries believed that the newly freed serfs were
merely being sold into wage slavery in the onset of the industrial
revolution, and that the bourgeoisie had effectively replaced
landowners.

Alexander II invaded Outer Manchuria from the Chinese Empire between
1858–1860 and sold Russian America to the USA in 1867. In the late 1870s
Russia and the Ottoman Empire again clashed in the Balkans. From 1875 to
1877, the Balkan crisis intensified with rebellions against the Ottoman
rule by various Slavic nationalities, which the Ottoman Turks dominated
since the 16th century. This was seen as a political risk in Russia,
which similarly suppressed Muslims in Central Asia and Caucasia. Russian
nationalist opinion became a major domestic factor in its support for
liberating Balkan Christians from the Ottoman rule and making Bulgaria
and Serbia independent. In early 1877, Russia intervened on behalf of
Serbian and Russian volunteer forces when it went to war with the
Ottoman Empire. Within one year, Russian troops were nearing
Constantinople, and the Ottomans surrendered. Russia's nationalist
diplomats and generals persuaded Alexander II to force the Ottomans to
sign the Treaty of San Stefano in March 1878, creating an enlarged,
independent Bulgaria that stretched into the southwestern Balkans. When
Britain threatened to declare war over the terms of the Treaty of San
Stefano, an exhausted Russia backed down. At the Congress of Berlin in
July 1878, Russia agreed to the creation of a smaller Bulgaria, as an
autonomous principality inside the Ottoman Empire. As a result,
Pan-Slavists were left with a legacy of bitterness against
Austria-Hungary and Germany for failing to back Russia. The
disappointment at the results of the war stimulated revolutionary
tensions in the country. However, he helped Serbia, Romania and
Montenegro to gain independence from and strengthen themselves against
the Ottomans.

Following Alexander's assassination by the Narodnaya Volya, a Nihilist
terrorist organization, in 1881, the throne passed to his son Alexander
III (1881–1894), a reactionary who revived the maxim of "Autocracy,
Orthodoxy, and Respect to the People" of Nicholas I. A committed
Slavophile, Alexander III believed that Russia could be saved from
turmoil only by shutting itself off from the subversive influences of
Western Europe. During his reign Russia declared the union with
republican France to contain the growing power of Germany, completed the
conquest of Central Asia and demanded important territorial and
commercial concessions from China.

The tsar's most influential adviser was Konstantin Petrovich
Pobedonostsev, tutor to Alexander III and his son Nicholas, and
procurator of the Holy Synod from 1880 to 1895. He taught his royal
pupils to fear freedom of speech and press, as well as disliking
democracy, constitutions, and the parliamentary system. Under
Pobedonostsev, revolutionaries were persecuted and a policy of
Russification was carried out throughout the Empire.

### Early twentieth century

In 1894, Alexander III was succeeded by his son, Nicholas II, who was
committed to retaining the autocracy that his father had left him. The
Industrial Revolution began to show significant influence in Russia. The
liberal elements among industrial capitalists and nobility believed in
peaceful social reform and a constitutional monarchy, forming the
Constitutional Democrats, or Kadets. The Socialist-Revolutionaries (SRs)
incorporated the Narodnik tradition and advocated the distribution of
land among those who actually worked it — the peasants. Another radical
group was the Social Democrats, exponents of Marxism in Russia. The
Social Democrats differed from the SRs in that they believed a
revolution must rely on urban workers, not the peasantry.

In 1903, at the Social Democrat party's Second Congress in London, the
party split into two wings: the gradualist Mensheviks and the more
radical Bolsheviks. The Mensheviks believed that the Russian working
class was insufficiently developed and that socialism could be achieved
only after a period of bourgeois democratic rule. They thus tended to
ally themselves with the forces of bourgeois liberalism. The Bolsheviks,
under Vladimir Lenin, supported the idea of forming a small elite of
professional revolutionists, subject to strong party discipline, to act
as the vanguard of the proletariat in order to seize power by force.

Defeat in the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905) was a major blow to the
Tsarist regime and further increased the potential for unrest. In
January 1905, an incident known as "Bloody Sunday" occurred when Father
Gapon led an enormous crowd to the Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg to
present a petition to the Tsar. When the procession reached the palace,
Cossacks opened fire on the crowd, killing hundreds. The Russian masses
were so furious over the massacre that a general strike was declared
demanding a democratic republic. This marked the beginning of the
Russian Revolution of 1905. Soviets (councils of workers) appeared in
most cities to direct revolutionary activity. Russia was paralyzed, and
the government was desperate.

In 1904, Nicholas and his wife, Tsarina Alexandra, after having four
girls, finally had a son, Tsarevich Alexei. However, Alexei inherited
from Alexandra, who was a granddaughter of England's Queen Victoria, the
genetic disease hemophilia, an illness which had afflicted many other
European royal descendants of the queen. The illness of Alexei led to
the astonishing rise of the semi-illiterate Siberian peasant Grigori
Rasputin, at court, who had was said to have had healing powers for the
heir to the throne. In time, he would have increasing influence on the
court, especially the mystical Alexandra.

Tsar Nicholas II and his subjects entered World War I with enthusiasm
and patriotism, with the defense of Russia's fellow Orthodox Slavs, the
Serbs, as the main battle cry. In August 1914, the Russian army invaded
Germany's province of East Prussia and occupied a significant portion of
Austrian-controlled Galicia in support of the Serbs and their allies -
the French and British. Military reversals and shortages among the
civilian population, however, soon soured much of the population. German
control of the Baltic Sea and German-Ottoman control of the Black Sea
severed Russia from most of its foreign supplies and potential markets.

By the middle of 1915, the impact of the war was demoralizing. Food and
fuel were in short supply, casualties were increasing, and inflation was
mounting. Strikes increased among low-paid factory workers, and there
were reports that peasants, who wanted reforms of land ownership, were
restless. The tsar eventually decided to take personal command of the
army and moved to the front, leaving Alexandra in charge in the capital.
Alexandra, in turn, relied heavily on Rasputin. Rasputin's assassination
in late 1916 by a clique of nobles ended the scandal but did not restore
the autocracy's lost prestige.

On 3 March 1917, a strike was organized on a factory in the capital
Saint Petersburg; within a week nearly all the workers in the city were
idle, and street fighting broke out.

The strikers held mass meetings in defiance of the regime, and the army
openly sided with the workers. A few days later a provisional government
headed by Georgy Lvov was named by the Duma. Meanwhile, the socialists
in Saint Petersburg had formed a Soviet (council) of workers' and
soldiers' deputies, forming an uneasy alliance with the Provisional
Government. With his authority destroyed, Nicholas abdicated on 2 March
1917 (Julian calendar; the Gregorian date was 15 March). He and his
family were subsequently executed by the Bolsheviks in 1918, during the
Russian Civil War.

Territory
---------

### Boundaries

The administrative boundaries of European Russia, apart from Finland and
its portion of Poland, coincided approximately with the natural limits
of the East-European plains. In the North it met the Arctic Ocean. The
islands of Novaya Zemlya, Kolguyev and Vaigach also belonged to it, but
the Kara Sea was referred to Siberia. To the East it had the Asiatic
territories of the Empire, Siberia and the Kyrgyz steppes, from both of
which it was separated by the Ural Mountains, the Ural River and the
Caspian Sea — the administrative boundary, however, partly extending
into Asia on the Siberian slope of the Urals. To the South it had the
Black Sea and Caucasus, being separated from the latter by the Manych
depression, which in Post-Pliocene times connected the Sea of Azov with
the Caspian. The West boundary was purely conventional: it crossed the
peninsula of Kola from the Varangerfjord to the Gulf of Bothnia. Thence
it ran to the Kurisches Haff in the southern Baltic, and thence to the
mouth of the Danube, taking a great circular sweep to the West to
embrace Poland, and separating Russia from Prussia, Austrian Galicia and
Romania.

It is a special feature of Russia that it has few free outlets to the
open sea other than on the ice-bound shores of the Arctic Ocean. The
deep indentations of the gulfs of Bothnia and Finland were surrounded by
what is ethnological Finnish territory, and it is only at the very head
of the latter gulf that the Russians had taken firm foothold by erecting
their capital at the mouth of the Neva. The Gulf of Riga and the Baltic
belong also to territory which was not inhabited by Slavs, but by Baltic
and Finnic peoples and by Germans. The East coast of the Black Sea
belonged to Transcaucasia, a great chain of mountains separating it from
Russia. But even this sheet of water is an inland sea, the only outlet
of which, the Bosphorus, was in foreign hands, while the Caspian, an
immense shallow lake, mostly bordered by deserts, possessed more
importance as a link between Russia and its Asiatic settlements than as
a channel for intercourse with other countries.

### Geography

By the end of the 19th century the size of the empire was about or
almost 1/6 of the Earth's landmass; its only rival in size at the time
was the British Empire. However, at this time, the majority of the
population lived in European Russia. More than 100 different ethnic
groups lived in the Russian Empire, with ethnic Russians comprising
about 45% of the population.

### Territorial development

In addition to almost the entire territory of modern Russia, prior to
1917 the Russian Empire included most of Ukraine (Dnieper Ukraine and
Crimea), Belarus, Moldova (Bessarabia), Finland (Grand Principality of
Finland), Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia (including Mengrelia), the
Central Asian states of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan (Russian Turkestan), most of Lithuania, Estonia and
Latvia (Baltic provinces), as well as a significant portion of Poland
(Kingdom of Poland) and Ardahan, Artvin, Iğdır Province|Iğdır, Kars and
northeastern part of Erzurum from Turkey (then part of the Ottoman
Empire). Between 1742 and 1867, the Russian Empire administered Alaska
as a colony. The Russian-American Company also established settlements
in Hawaii, including Fort Elizabeth and as far south in North America as
Fort Ross Colony in Sonoma County just north of San Francisco. Both Fort
Ross and the Russian River in California got their names from these
Russian settlers, who had staked claims in a region that was, at the
time, claimed as part of New Spain.

Following the Swedish defeat in the Finnish War and the signing of the
Treaty of Fredrikshamn on 17 September 1809, the eastern half of Sweden,
the area that then became Finland was incorporated into the Russian
Empire as an autonomous grand principality. The Tsar eventually ended up
ruling the Finland as a semi-constitutional monarch through his governor
and a native Finnish Senate appointed by him. The Emperor never
explicitly recognized Finland as a constitutional state in its own
right, however, although his Finnish subjects came to consider the grand
principality as one.

During World War I, Russia briefly occupied a small part of East
Prussia, then part of Germany; a significant portion of Austrian
Galicia; and significant portions of Ottoman Armenia. While the modern
Russian Federation currently controls the Kaliningrad Oblast, which
comprised the northern part of East Prussia, this is a different area
than that captured by the Empire in 1914, though there was some overlap:
Gusev (*Ger*: Gumbinnen) was the site of the initial Russian victory.

### Imperial territories

According to the 1st article of the Organic law, the Russian Empire was
one indivisible state. In addition, the 26th article stated that "With
the Imperial Russian throne are indivisible the Kingdom of Poland and
Grand Principality of Finland". Relations with the Grand Principality of
Finland were also regulated by the 2nd article, "The Grand Principality
of Finland, constituted an indivisible part of the Russian state, in its
internal affairs governed by special regulations at the base of special
laws" and the law of 10 June 1910.

Between 1744 and 1867, the empire also controlled the so-called *Russian
America*. With the exception of this territorymodern-day Alaskathe
Russian Empire was a contiguous mass of land spanning Europe and Asia.
In this it differed from contemporary colonial-style empires. The result
of this was that while the British and French Empire declined in the
20th century, the Russian Empire kept a large portion of its territory,
first as the Communist Soviet Union, and latter as part of the
present-day Russian Federation.

Furthermore, the empire at times controlled concession territories,
notably the port of Kwantung and the Chinese Eastern Railway Zone, both
conceded by imperial China, as well as a concession in Tianjin. See for
these periods of extraterritorial control the relations between the
Empire of Japan and the Russian Empire.

In 1815, Dr. Schäffer, a Russian entrepreneur, went to Kauai and
negotiated a treaty of protection with the island's governor Kaumualii,
vassal of King Kamehameha I of Hawaii, but the Russian Tsar refused to
ratify the treaty. See also Orthodox Church in Hawaii and Russian Fort
Elizabeth.

In 1889, a Russian adventurer, Nikolay Ivanovitch Achinov, tried to
establish a Russian colony in Africa, Sagallo, situated on the Gulf of
Tadjoura in present-day Djibouti. However this attempt angered the
French, who dispatched two gunboats against the colony. After a brief
resistance, the colony surrendered and the Russian settlers were
deported to Odessa.

Government and administration
-----------------------------

From its initial creation until the 1905 Revolution, the Russian Empire
was controlled by its tsar/emperor as an absolute monarch, under the
system of tsarist autocracy. After the Revolution of 1905, Russia
developed a new type of government which became difficult to categorize.
In the Almanach de Gotha for 1910, Russia was described as "a
constitutional monarchy under an autocratic tsar." This contradiction in
terms demonstrated the difficulty of precisely defining the system,
essentially transitional and meanwhile *sui generis*, established in the
Russian Empire after October 1905. Before this date, the fundamental
laws of Russia described the power of the Emperor as "autocratic and
unlimited." After October 1905, while the imperial style was still
"Emperor and Autocrat of All the Russias", the fundamental laws were
remodeled by removing the word *unlimited*. While the emperor retained
many of his old prerogatives, including an absolute veto over all
legislation, he equally agreed to the establishment of an elected
parliament, without whose consent no laws were to be enacted in Russia.
Not that the regime in Russia had become in any true sense
constitutional, far less parliamentary. But the "unlimited autocracy"
had given place to a "self-limited autocracy." Whether this autocracy
was to be permanently limited by the new changes, or only at the
continuing discretion of the autocrat, became a subject of heated
controversy between conflicting parties in the state. Provisionally,
then, the Russian governmental system may perhaps be best defined as "a
limited monarchy under an autocratic emperor."

### Emperor

Peter the Great changed his title from Tsar in 1721, when he was
declared *Emperor of all Russia.* While later rulers kept this title,
the ruler of Russia was commonly known as *Tsar* or *Tsaritsa* until the
fall of the Empire during the February Revolution of 1917. Prior to the
issuance of the October Manifesto, the Emperor ruled as an absolute
monarch, subject to only two limitations on his authority (both of which
were intended to protect the existing system): the Emperor and his
consort must both belong to the Russian Orthodox Church, and he must
obey the laws of succession (Pauline Laws) established by Paul I. Beyond
this, the power of the Russian Autocrat was virtually limitless.

On 17 October 1905, the situation changed: the Emperor voluntarily
limited his legislative power by decreeing that no measure was to become
law without the consent of the Imperial Duma, a freely elected national
assembly established by the Organic Law issued on 28 April 1906.
However, the Emperor retained the right to disband the newly established
Duma, and he exercised this right more than once. He also retained an
absolute veto over all legislation, and only he could initiate any
changes to the Organic Law itself. His ministers were responsible solely
to him, and not to the Duma or any other authority, which could question
but not remove them. Thus, while the Emperor's power was limited in
scope after 28 April 1906, it still remained formidable.

### Imperial Council

Under Russia's revised Fundamental Law of 20 February 1906, the Council
of the Empire was associated with the Duma as a legislative Upper House;
from this time the legislative power was exercised normally by the
Emperor only in concert with the two chambers. The Council of the
Empire, or Imperial Council, as reconstituted for this purpose,
consisted of 196 members, of whom 98 were nominated by the Emperor,
while 98 were elective. The ministers, also nominated, were *ex officio*
members. Of the elected members, 3 were returned by the "black" clergy
(the monks), 3 by the "white" clergy (seculars), 18 by the corporations
of nobles, 6 by the academy of sciences and the universities, 6 by the
chambers of commerce, 6 by the industrial councils, 34 by the
governments having zemstvos, 16 by those having no zemstvos, and 6 by
Poland. As a legislative body the powers of the Council were coordinate
with those of the Duma; in practice, however, it has seldom if ever
initiated legislation.

### State Duma and the electoral system

The Duma of the Empire or Imperial Duma (Gosudarstvennaya Duma), which
formed the Lower House of the Russian parliament, consisted (since the
ukaz of 2 June 1907) of 442 members, elected by an exceedingly
complicated process. The membership was manipulated as to secure an
overwhelming majority of the wealthy (especially the landed classes) and
also for the representatives of the Russian peoples at the expense of
the subject nations. Each province of the Empire, except Central Asia,
returned a certain number of members; added to these were those returned
by several large cities. The members of the Duma were chosen by
electoral colleges and these, in their turn, were elected in assemblies
of the three classes: landed proprietors, citizens and peasants. In
these assemblies the wealthiest proprietors sat in person while the
lesser proprietors were represented by delegates. The urban population
was divided into two categories according to taxable wealth, and elected
delegates directly to the college of the Governorates. The peasants were
represented by delegates selected by the regional subdivisions called
volosts. Workmen were treated in special manner with every industrial
concern employing fifty hands or over electing one or more delegates to
the electoral college.

In the college itself, the voting for the Duma was by secret ballot and
a simple majority carried the day. Since the majority consisted of
conservative elements (the landowners and urban delegates), the
progressives had little chance of representation at all save for the
curious provision that one member at least in each government was to be
chosen from each of the five classes represented in the college. That
the Duma had any radical elements was mainly due to the peculiar
franchise enjoyed by the seven largest towns — Saint Petersburg, Moscow,
Kiev, Odessa, Riga and the Polish cities of Warsaw and Łódź. These
elected their delegates to the Duma directly, and though their votes
were divided (on the basis of taxable property) in such a way as to give
the advantage to wealth, each returned the same number of delegates.

### Council of Ministers

By the law of 18 October 1905, to assist the Emperor in the supreme
administration a Council of Ministers (Sovyet Ministrov) was created,
under a *minister president*, the first appearance of a prime minister
in Russia. This council consists of all the ministers and of the heads
of the principal administrations. The ministries were as follows:

-   Ministry of the Imperial Court
-   Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
-   Ministry of War;
-   Ministry of Navy
-   Ministry of Finance;
-   Ministry of Commerce and Industry (created in 1905);
-   Ministry of Internal affairs (including police, health, censorship
    and press, posts and telegraphs, foreign religions, statistics);
-   Ministry of Agriculture and State Assets;
-   Ministry of ways of Communications;
-   Ministry of Justice;
-   Ministry of National Enlightenment.

### Most Holy Synod

The Most Holy Synod (established in 1721) was the supreme organ of
government of the Orthodox Church in Russia. It was presided over by a
lay procurator, representing the Emperor, and consisted of the three
metropolitans of Moscow, Saint Petersburg and Kiev, the archbishop of
Georgia, and a number of bishops sitting in rotation.

### Senate

The Senate (Pravitelstvuyushchi Senat, i.e. directing or governing
senate), originally established during the Government reform of Peter I,
consisted of members nominated by the Emperor. Its wide variety of
functions were carried out by the different departments into which it
was divided. It was the supreme court of cassation; an audit office, a
high court of justice for all political offences; one of its departments
fulfilled the functions of a heralds' college. It also had supreme
jurisdiction in all disputes arising out of the administration of the
Empire, notably differences between representatives of the central power
and the elected organs of local self-government. Lastly, it promulgated
new laws, a function which theoretically gave it a power akin to that of
the Supreme Court of the United States, of rejecting measures not in
accordance with fundamental laws.

### Administrative divisions

For the purposes of administration, Russia was divided (as of 1914) into
81 governorates (*guberniyas*), 20 oblasts, and 1 okrug. Vassals and
protectorates of the Russian Empire included the Emirate of Bukhara, the
Khanate of Khiva and, after 1914, Tuva (Uriankhai). Of these 11
Governorates, 17 oblasts and 1 okrug (Sakhalin) belonged to Asian
Russia. Of the rest 8 Governorates were in Finland, 10 in Poland.
European Russia thus embraced 59 governorates and 1 oblast (that of the
Don). The Don Oblast was under the direct jurisdiction of the ministry
of war; the rest had each a governor and deputy-governor, the latter
presiding over the administrative council. In addition there were
governors-general, generally placed over several governorates and armed
with more extensive powers usually including the command of the troops
within the limits of their jurisdiction. In 1906, there were
governors-general in Finland, Warsaw, Vilna, Kiev, Moscow, and Riga. The
larger cities (Saint Petersburg, Moscow, Odessa, Sevastopol, Kerch,
Nikolayev, Rostov) had an administrative system of their own,
independent of the governorates; in these the chief of police acted as
governor.

Judicial system
---------------

The judicial system of the Russian Empire, existed from the mid-19th
century, was established by the "tsar emancipator" Alexander II, by the
statute of 20 November 1864 (*Sudebny Ustav*). This system — based
partly on English, partly on French models — was built up on certain
broad principles: the separation of the judicial and administrative
functions, the independence of the judges and courts, the publicity of
trials and oral procedure, the equality of all classes before the law.
Moreover, a democratic element was introduced by the adoption of the
jury system and—so far as one order of tribunal was concerned—the
election of judges. The establishment of a judicial system on these
principles constituted a major change in the conception of the Russian
state, which, by placing the administration of justice outside the
sphere of the executive power, ceased to be a despotism. This fact made
the system especially obnoxious to the bureaucracy, and during the
latter years of Alexander II and the reign of Alexander III there was a
piecemeal taking back of what had been given. It was reserved for the
third Duma, after the 1905 Revolution, to begin the reversal of this
process.

The system established by the law of 1864 was significant in that it set
up two wholly separate orders of tribunals, each having their own courts
of appeal and coming in contact only in the Senate, as the supreme court
of cassation. The first of these, based on the English model, are the
courts of the elected justices of the peace, with jurisdiction over
petty causes, whether civil or criminal; the second, based on the French
model, are the ordinary tribunals of nominated judges, sitting with or
without a jury to hear important cases.

Local administration
--------------------

Alongside the local organs of the central government in Russia there are
three classes of local elected bodies charged with administrative
functions:

-   the peasant assemblies in the *mir* and the *volost*;
-   the *zemstvos* in the 34 Governorates of Russia;
-   the *municipal dumas*.

### Municipal dumas

Since 1870 the municipalities in European Russia have had institutions
like those of the zemstvos. All owners of houses, and tax-paying
merchants, artisans and workmen are enrolled on lists in a descending
order according to their assessed wealth. The total valuation is then
divided into three equal parts, representing three groups of electors
very unequal in number, each of which elects an equal number of
delegates to the municipal duma. The executive is in the hands of an
elective mayor and an *uprava*, which consists of several members
elected by the duma. Under Alexander III, however, by laws promulgated
in 1892 and 1894, the municipal dumas were subordinated to the governors
in the same way as the zemstvos. In 1894 municipal institutions, with
still more restricted powers, were granted to several towns in Siberia,
and in 1895 to some in Caucasia.

### Baltic provinces

The formerly Swedish-controlled Baltic provinces (Courland, Livonia and
Estonia) were incorporated into the Russian Empire after the defeat of
Sweden in the Great Northern War. Under the Treaty of Nystad of 1721,
the Baltic German nobility retained considerable powers of
self-government and numerous privileges in matters affecting education,
police and the administration of local justice. After 167 years of
German language administration and education, laws were declared in 1888
and 1889 where the rights of the police and manorial justice were
transferred from Baltic German control to officials of the central
government. Since about the same time a process of Russification was
being carried out in the same provinces, in all departments of
administration, in the higher schools and in the Imperial University of
Dorpat, the name of which was altered to Yuriev. In 1893 district
committees for the management of the peasants' affairs, similar to those
in the purely Russian governments, were introduced into this part of the
empire.

Economy
-------

### Mining and heavy industry

                   Ural Region   Southern Region   Caucasus   Siberia   Kingdom of Poland
  ---------------- ------------- ----------------- ---------- --------- -------------------
  Gold             18%           -                 -          81.2%     -
  Platinum         100%          -                 -          -         -
  Silver           36%           -                 24.3%      29.3%     -
  Lead             5.8%          -                 92%        -         0.9%
  Zinc             -             -                 25.2%      -         74.8%
  Copper           54.9%         -                 30.2%      14.9%     -
  Pig Iron         19.4%         67.7%             -          -         9.3%
  Iron and Steel   17.3%         36.2%             -          -         10.8%
  Manganese        0.3%          29.2%             70.3%      -         -
  Coal             3.4%          67.3%             -          5.8%      22.3%
  Petroleum        -             -                 97%        -         -

  : Output of mining industry and heavy industry of Russian Empire by
  region in 1912 (in percent of the national output).

Infrastructure
--------------

### Railways

The planning and building of the railway network after 1860 had
far-reaching effects on the economy, culture, and ordinary life of
Russia. The central authorities and the imperial elite made most of the
key decisions, but local elites set up a demand for rail linkages. Local
nobles, merchants, and entrepreneurs imagined the future from "locality"
'(mestnost')' to "empire" to promote their regional interests. Often
they had to compete with other cities. By envisioning their own role in
a rail network they came to understand how important they were to the
empire's economy. The Russian army built two major railway lines in
Central Asia during the 1880s. The Trans-Caucasian Railway connected the
oil center of Batumi on the Black Sea and the city of Baku on the
Caspian Sea. The Trans-Caspian Railway began at Krasnovodsk on the
Caspian Sea and reached Bukhara, Samarkand and Tashkent. Both lines
served the commercial and strategic needs of the Empire, and facilitated
migration.

  ---------------- ------ ------ ------ ------- ------- ------- ------- -------
  **Year**         1840   1850   1860   1870    1880    1890    1900    1911
  **Kilometers**   26     601    1590   11243   23982   32390   56976   78468
  ---------------- ------ ------ ------ ------- ------- ------- ------- -------

### Seaports

  Port                  Tonnage   Position
  --------------------- --------- ---------------
  Riga                  1528      Baltic Sea
  Kerch                 33        Black Sea
  Arkhangelsk           549       White Sea
  Feodosia              175       Black Sea
  Onega                 98        White Sea
  Mariupol              266       Black Sea
  Evpatoria             66        Black Sea
  Sukhum                45        Black Sea
  Izmail                47        Black Sea
  Astara                64        Caspian Sea
  Vladivostok           891       Pacific Ocean
  Nikolayevsk-on-Amur   57        Pacific Ocean
  Astrakhan             34        Caspian Sea
  Baku                  286       Caspian Sea
  Reni                  173       Black Sea
  Krasnovodsk           21        Caspian Sea
  Batum                 898       Black Sea
  Poti                  348       Black Sea
  Berdyansk             80        Black Sea
  Novorossiysk          646       Black Sea
  Nikolayev             721       Black Sea
  Libava                796       Baltic Sea
  Odessa                1243      Black Sea
  Narva                 95        Baltic Sea
  Kherson               252       Black Sea
  Revel                 65        Baltic Sea
  Sevastopol            44        Black Sea
  Saint Petersburg      2024      Baltic Sea
  Genichensk            67        Black Sea
  Pernov                23        Baltic Sea
  Taganrog              657       Black Sea
  Vindava               604       Baltic Sea

  : Biggest seaports of Russian Empire by tonnage of visiting ships in
  1912 (the figures for tonnage are in thousands of tonns)

Religion
--------

The Russian Empire's state religion was Russian Orthodox Christianity.
Its head was the tsar, who held the title of supreme defender of the
Church. Although he made and annulled all appointments, he did not
determine the questions of dogma or church teaching. The principal
ecclesiastical authority was the Holy Synod, the head of which, the Over
Procurator of the Holy Synod, was one of the council of ministers and
exercised very wide powers in ecclesiastical matters. All religions were
freely professed, except that certain restrictions were laid upon the
Jews. According to returns published in 1905, based on the Russian
Empire Census of 1897, adherents of the different religious communities
in the whole of the Russian empire numbered approximately as follows.

  Religion                        Count of believers       %
  ------------------------------- ------------------------ --------------------
  Russian Orthodox                align=right|87,123,604   align=right| 69.3%
  Muslims                         align=right|13,906,972   align=right| 11.1%
  Latin Catholics                 align=right|11,467,994   align=right|9.1%
  Jews                            align=right|5,215,805    align=right|4.2%
  Lutherans                       align=right|3,572,653    align=right|2.8%
  Old Believers                   align=right|2,204,596    align=right|1.8%
  Armenian Apostolics             align=right|1,179,241    align=right|0.9%
  Buddhists and Lamaists          align=right|433,863      align=right|0.4%
  Other non-Christian religions   align=right|285,321      align=right|0.2%
  Reformed                        align=right|85,400       align=right|0.1%
  Mennonites                      align=right|66,564       align=right|0.1%
  Armenian Catholics              align=right|38,840       align=right|0.0%
  Baptists                        align=right|38,139       align=right|0.0%
  Karaite Jews                    align=right|12,894       align=right|0.0%
  Anglicans                       align=right|4,183        align=right|0.0%
  Other Christian religions       align=right|3,952        align=right|0.0%

The ecclesiastical heads of the national Russian Orthodox Church
consisted of three metropolitans (Saint Petersburg, Moscow, Kiev),
fourteen archbishops and fifty bishops, all drawn from the ranks of the
monastic (celibate) clergy. The parochial clergy had to be married when
appointed, but if left widowers were not allowed to marry again; this
rule continues to apply today.

Military
--------

The Russian Empire's military consisted of the Imperial Russian Army,
Imperial Russian Navy, and the Imperial Russian Air Force.

Society
-------

The Russian Empire was, predominantly, a rural society spread over vast
spaces. In 1913, 80% of the people were peasants. Soviet historiography
proclaimed that the Russian Empire of the 19th century was characterized
by systemic crisis, which impoverished the workers and peasants and
culminated in the revolutions of the early 20th century. Recent research
by Russian scholars disputes this interpretation. Mironov assesses the
effects of the reforms of latter 19th-century especially in terms of the
1861 emancipation of the serfs, agricultural output trends, various
standard of living indicators, and taxation of peasants. He argues that
they brought about measurable improvements in social welfare. More
generally, he finds that the well-being of the Russian people declined
during the most of the 18th century, but increased slowly from the end
of the 18th century to 1914.

### Estates

Subjects of the Russian Empire were segregated into *sosloviyes*, or
social estates (classes) such as nobility (*dvoryanstvo*), clergy,
merchants, cossacks and peasants. Native people of the Caucasus,
non-ethnic Russian areas such as Tartarstan, Bashkirstan, Siberia and
Central Asia were officially registered as a category called *inorodtsy*
(non-Slavic, literally: "people of another origin").

A majority of the people, 81.6%, belonged to the peasant order, the
others were: nobility, 0.6%; clergy, 0.1%; the burghers and merchants,
9.3%; and military, 6.1%. More than 88 million of the Russians were
peasants. A part of them were formerly serfs (10,447,149 males in
1858) – the remainder being " state peasants " (9,194,891 males in 1858,
exclusive of the Archangel Governorate) and " domain peasants " (842,740
males the same year).

### Serfdom

The serfdom which had developed in Russia in the 16th century, and
became enshrined by law in 1649, was abolished in 1861.

The household servants or dependents attached to the personal service
were merely set free, while the landed peasants received their houses
and orchards, and allotments of arable land. These allotments were given
over to the rural commune (*mir*), which was made responsible for the
payment of taxes for the allotments. For these allotments the peasants
had to pay a fixed rent which could be fulfilled by personal labour. The
allotments could be redeemed by peasants with the help of the Crown, and
then they were freed from all obligations to the landlord. The Crown
paid the landlord and the peasants had to repay the Crown, for
forty-nine years at 6% interest. The financial redemption to the
landlord was not calculated on the value of the allotments, but was
considered as a compensation for the loss of the compulsory labour of
the serfs. Many proprietors contrived to curtail the allotments which
the peasants had occupied under serfdom, and frequently deprived them of
precisely the parts of which they were most in need: pasture lands
around their houses. The result was to compel the peasants to rent land
from their former masters.

### Peasants

After the Emancipation reform, one quarter of peasants received
allotments of only per male, and one-half less than 8.5 to 11.4 acres;
the normal size of the allotment necessary for the subsistence of a
family under the three-fields system is estimated at 28 to . Land must
thus of necessity be rented from the landlords. The aggregate value of
the redemption and land taxes often reached 185 to 275% of the normal
rental value of the allotments, not to speak of taxes for recruiting
purposes, the church, roads, local administration and so on, chiefly
levied from the peasants. The areas increased every year; one-fifth of
the inhabitants left their houses; cattle disappeared. Every year more
than half the adult males (in some districts three-quarters of the men
and one-third of the women) quit their homes and wandered throughout
Russia in search of labor. In the governments of the Black Earth Area
the state of matters was hardly better. Many peasants took "gratuitous
allotments," whose amount was about one-eighth of the normal allotments.

The average allotment in Kherson was only, and for allotments from 2.9
to the peasants pay 5 to 10 rubles of redemption tax. The state peasants
were better off, but still they were emigrating in masses. It was only
in the steppe governments that the situation was more hopeful. In
Ukraine, where the allotments were personal (the mir existing only among
state peasants), the state of affairs does not differ for the better, on
account of the high redemption taxes. In the western provinces, where
the land was valued cheaper and the allotments somewhat increased after
the Polish insurrection, the general situation was better. Finally, in
the Baltic provinces nearly all the land belonged to the German
landlords, who either farmed the land themselves, with hired laborers,
or let it in small farms. Only one quarter of the peasants were farmers;
the remainder were mere laborers.

### Landowners

The situation of the former serf-proprietors was also unsatisfactory.
Accustomed to the use of compulsory labor, they failed to adapt to the
new conditions. The millions of rubles of redemption money received from
the crown was spent without any real or lasting agricultural
improvements having been effected. The forests were sold, and the only
prosperous landlords were those who exacted rack-rents for the land
without which the peasants could not live upon their allotments. During
the years 1861 to 1892 the land owned by the nobles decreased 30%, or
from 210,000,000 to 150,000,000 acres (610,000 km^2^); during the
following four years an additional were sold; and since then the sales
went on at an accelerated rate, until in 1903 alone close to 2,000,000
acres (8,000 km^2^) passed out of their hands. On the other hand, since
1861, and more especially since 1882, when the Peasant Land Bank was
founded for making advances to peasants who were desirous of purchasing
land, the former serfs, or rather their descendants, had between 1883
and 1904 bought about from their former masters. There was an increase
of wealth among the few, but along with this a general impoverishment of
the mass of the people, and the peculiar institution of the mir—framed
on the principle of community of ownership and occupation of the land--,
the effect was not conducive to the growth of individual effort. In
November 1906, however, the emperor Nicholas II promulgated a
provisional order permitting the peasants to become freeholders of
allotments made at the time of emancipation, all redemption dues being
remitted. This measure, which was endorsed by the third Duma in an act
passed on 21 December 1908, is calculated to have far-reaching and
profound effects on the rural economy of Russia. Thirteen years
previously the government had endeavored to secure greater fixity and
permanence of tenure by providing that at least twelve years must elapse
between every two redistributions of the land belonging to a mir amongst
those entitled to share in it. The order of November 1906 had provided
that the various strips of land held by each peasant should be merged
into a single holding; the Duma, however, on the advice of the
government, left this to the future, as an ideal that could only
gradually be realized.

See also
--------

-   List of Emperors of Russia
-   Coronation of the Russian monarch
-   Imperial Crown of Russia
-   Regalia of the Russian tsars
-   Russification
-   Expansion of Russia 1500–1800
-   Russian conquest of Siberia
-   Russian conquest of the Caucasus
-   Russian colonization of the Americas
-   List of largest empires

Notes
-----

References
----------

Footnotes

General references

-   -   Warnes, David. *Chronicle of the Russian Tsars: The
    Reign-by-Reign Record of the Rulers of Imperial Russia*. Thames &
    Hudson, 1999.
-   

Further reading
---------------

### Surveys

-   Ascher, Abraham. *Russia: A Short History* (2011) [excerpt and text
    search](http://www.amazon.com/Russia-Short-History-Histories-ebook/dp/B00550O2S6/)
-   Bushkovitch, Paul. *A Concise History of Russia* (2011) [excerpt and
    text
    search](http://www.amazon.com/Concise-History-Russia-Cambridge-Histories/dp/0521543231/)
-   -   Hosking, Geoffrey. *Russia and the Russians: A History* (2nd ed.
    2011)
-   -   Lincoln, W. Bruce. *The Romanovs: Autocrats of All the Russias*
    (1983) [excerpt and text
    search](http://www.amazon.com/Romanovs-Autocrats-All-Russias/dp/0385279086/),
    sweeping narrative history
-   -   McKenzie, David & Michael W. Curran. *A History of Russia, the
    Soviet Union, and Beyond*. 6th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth
    Publishing, 2001. ISBN 0-534-58698-8.
-   Moss, Walter G. *A History of Russia*. Vol. 1: *To 1917*. 2d ed.
    Anthem Press, 2002.
-   Perrie, Maureen, et al. *The Cambridge History of Russia*. (3 vol.
    Cambridge University Press, 2006). [excerpt and text
    search](http://www.amazon.com/The-Cambridge-History-Russia-Volume/dp/0521812275/)
-   Riasanovsky, Nicholas V. and Mark D. Steinberg. *A History of
    Russia*. 7th ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004, 800 pages.
    ISBN 0-19-515394-4
-   Ziegler; Charles E. *The History of Russia* (Greenwood Press, 1999)
    [online edition](http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=23391126)

### 1801-1917

-   Jelavich, Barbara. '' St. Petersburg and Moscow: tsarist and Soviet
    foreign policy, 1814-1974'' (1974)
-   Manning, Roberta. *The Crisis of the Old Order in Russia: Gentry and
    Government*. Princeton University Press, 1982.
-   Pipes, Richard. *Russia under the Old Regime* (2nd ed. 1997)
-   Seton-Watson, Hugh. *The Russian Empire 1801-1917* (Oxford History
    of Modern Europe) [excerpt and text
    search](http://www.amazon.com/Russian-Empire-1801-1917-Oxford-History/dp/0198221525/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1393843172&sr=1-1)
-   -   

### Military

-   -   Fuller, William C. *Strategy and Power in Russia 1600-1914*
    (1998) [excerpts](http://www.amazon.com/dp/B001D1YCWC/); military
    strategy
-   Stone, David. *A Military History of Russia: From Ivan the Terrible
    to the War in Chechnya*
    [excerpts](http://www.amazon.com/Military-History-Russia-Terrible-Chechnya-ebook/dp/B0029LGW5A/)

### Economic, social and ethnic history

-   Christian, David. *A History of Russia, Central Asia and Mongolia*.
    Vol. 1: *Inner Eurasia from Prehistory to the Mongol Empire*.
    (Blackwell, 1998). ISBN 0-631-20814-3.
-   -   Etkind, Alexander. *Internal Colonization: Russia's Imperial
    Experience* (Polity Press, 2011) 289 pages; discussion of serfdom,
    the peasant commune, etc.
-   -   Mironov, Boris N., and Ben Eklof. *The Social History of
    Imperial Russia, 1700-1917* (2 vol Westview Press, 2000) [vol 1
    online](http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=89764491); [vol 2
    online](http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=100513328)
-   Mironov, Boris N. (2012) *The Standard of Living and Revolutions in
    Imperial Russia, 1700-1917* (2012) [excerpt and text
    search](http://www.amazon.com/Standard-Revolutions-1700-1917-Routledge-Explorations/dp/0415608546/)
-   Mironov, Boris N. (2010) "Wages and Prices in Imperial Russia,
    1703–1913," *Russian Review* (Jan 2010) 69\#1 pp 47–72, with 13
    tables and 3 charts
    [online](http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/detail?sid=e380f9ff-36a4-426e-88fd-b587d8fe61e9%40sessionmgr12&vid=1&hid=25&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZQ%3d%3d)
-   -   Stolberg, Eva-Maria. (2004) "The Siberian Frontier and Russia's
    Position in World History," *Review: A Journal of the Fernand
    Braudel Center* 27\#3 pp 243–267

External links
--------------

-   -   [Russian Empire](http://www.rusempire.com/): All about Russian
    Empire and Russia
-   -   [The Empire that was
    Russia](http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/empire/): color photographs from
    Library of Congress
    :   s:The New Student's Reference Work/Russia, Empire of|The New
        Student's Reference Work/Russia, Empire of

-   [General armorial of noble families in the Russian Empire
    (Gerbovnik)](http://gerbovnik.com)
-   [The Russian Imperial
    Collection](http://www.loc.gov/rr/rarebook/coll/214.html) at the
    Library of Congress

Category:Russian Empire| Category:Former Slavic countries
