The **Russian Provisional Government**  was a provisional government
of the Russian Republic immediately following the abdication of Tsar
Nicholas II (March 15, 1917). The government replaced the institution of
the Council of Ministers of Russia, members of which after the February
Revolution presided in the Chief Office of Admiralty. The intention of
the provisional government was the organization of elections to the
Russian Constituent Assembly and its convention. The government was
initially composed of the Kadet coalition led by Prince Georgy Lvov,
which was replaced by the Socialist coalition led by Alexander Kerensky.

On September 14, the country's legislature (the Duma) was officially
dissolved by the newly created Directorate and the country was
officially declared the **Russian Republic** (, translit. *Rossiyskaya
respublika*), even though the state status as such occurred with the
fall of monarchy (Tsar's abdication). The provisional government lasted
approximately eight months, and ceased to exist when the Bolsheviks took
over after the October Revolution (or November 1917, depending on
Calendar Dating Styles).

Overview
--------

The Provisional Government was formed in Petrograd by the Provisional
Committee of the State Duma and was led first by Prince Georgy Lvov and
then by Alexander Kerensky. At the same time the Russian Emperor
Nicholas II abdicated in favor of the Grand Duke Michael who agreed that
he would accept after the decision of Russian Constituent Assembly. The
Provisional Government was unable to make decisive policy decisions due
to political factionalism and a breakdown of state structures. This
weakness left the government open to strong challenges from both the
right and the left. The Provisional Government's chief adversary on the
left was the Petrograd Soviet, which tentatively cooperated with the
government at first, but then gradually gained control of the army,
factories, and railways. The period of competition for authority ended
in late October 1917, when Bolsheviks routed the ministers of the
Provisional Government in the events known as the October Revolution,
and placed power in the hands of the soviets, or "workers' councils,"
which they largely controlled.

The weakness of the Provisional Government is perhaps best reflected in
the derisive nickname given to Kerensky: "persuader-in-chief."

### World recognition

-   United States - March 22, 1917
-   France, Great Britain, and Italy - March 24, 1917

Formation and initial composition
---------------------------------

When the authority of the Tsar's government began disintegrating after
the February Revolution of 1917, two rival institutions, the Duma and
the Petrograd Soviet, competed for power. Tsar Nicholas II abdicated on
March 2 (Julian calendar) and nominated his brother, Grand Duke Michael
as the next tsar. Grand Duke Michael did not want to take the poisoned
chalice and deferred acceptance of imperial power the next day. Legal
authorization for the transfer of power was given by a proclamation
signed by Grand Duke Michael. The Provisional Government was expected to
rule until the Constituent Assembly later determined the form of
government in Russia. The Provisional Government was designed to set up
elections to the Assembly while maintaining essential government
services, but its power was effectively limited by the Petrograd
Soviet's growing authority.

Public announcement of the formation of the Provisional Government was
made. It was published in *Izvestia* the day after its formation. The
announcement stated the declaration of government:

-   Full and immediate amnesty on all issues political and religious,
    including: terrorist acts, military uprisings, and agrarian crimes
    etc.
-   Freedom of word, press, unions, assemblies, and strikes with spread
    of political freedoms to military servicemen within the restrictions
    allowed by military-technical conditions.
-   Abolition of all hereditary, religious, and national class
    restrictions.
-   Immediate preparations for the convocation on basis of universal,
    equal, secret, and direct vote for the Constituent Assembly which
    will determine the form of government and the constitution.
-   Replacement of the police with a public militsiya and its elected
    chairmanship subordinated to the local authorities.
-   Elections to the authorities of local self-government on basis of
    universal, direct, equal, and secret vote.
-   Non-disarmament and non-withdrawal out of Petrograd the military
    units participating in the revolution movement.
-   Under preservation of strict discipline in ranks and performing a
    military service - elimination of all restrictions for soldiers in
    the use of public rights granted to all other citizens.

*The provisional government feels obliged to add that it is not intended
to take advantage of military circumstances for any delay in
implementing the above reforms and measures.*

Initial composition of the Provisional Government:

  Post                                              Name                            Party                           Time of appointment
  ------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------- ------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Minister-President and Minister of the Interior   Georgy Lvov                                                     March 1917
  Minister of Foreign Affairs                       Pavel Milyukov                  Kadet                           March 1917
  Mikhail Tereshchenko                              Non-Party                       April 1917
  Minister of War and Navy                          Alexander Guchkov               Octobrist                       March 1917
  Alexander Kerensky                                Socialist-Revolutionary Party   April 1917
  Minister of Transport                             Nikolai Nekrasov                Kadet                           March 1917
  Minister of Trade and Industry                    Alexander Konovalov             Progressist                     March 1917
  Minister of Justice                               Alexander Kerensky              Socialist-Revolutionary Party   March 1917
  Pavel Pereverzev                                  Socialist-Revolutionary Party   April 1917
  Minister of Finance                               Mikhail Tereshchenko            Non-Party                       March 1917
  Andrei Shingarev                                  Kadet                           April 1917
  Minister of Education                             Andrei Manuilov                 Kadet                           March 1917
  Minister of Agriculture                           Andrei Shingarev                Kadet                           March 1917
  Victor Chernov                                    Socialist-Revolutionary Party   April 1917
  Minister of Labour                                Matvey Skobelev                 Menshevik                       April 1917
  Minister of Food                                  Alexey Peshekhonov              National socialists             April 1917
  Minister of Post and Telegraph                    Irakli Tsereteli                Menshevik                       April 1917
  Ober-Procurator of the Holy Synod                 Vladimir Lvov                   Progressist                     March 1917 |-Tsars disapproval of the [ Nicholas signed tsar] (Russia) intermediate the Minister of justice ( II)

April Crisis
------------

On April 18 (May 1) minister of Foreign Affairs Pavel Milyukov sent a
note to the Allied governments, promising to continue the war to 'its
glorious conclusion'. On April 20 (May 3) and 21 massive demonstrations
of workers and soldiers erupted against the continuation of war.
Demonstrations demanded resignation of Milyukov. They were soon met by
the counter-demonstrations organised in his support. General Lavr
Kornilov, commander of the Petrograd military district, wished to
suppress the disorders, but premier Georgy Lvov refused to resort to
violence.

The Provisional Government accepted the resignation of Foreign Minister
Milyukov and War Minister Guchkov, and made a proposal to the Petrograd
Soviet to form a coalition government. As a result of negotiations, on
May 5 (18) agreement was reached and 6 socialist ministers joined the
cabinet.

During this period the Provisional Government merely reflected the will
of the Soviet, where left tendencies (Bolshevism) were gaining ground.
The Government, however, influenced by the "bourgeois" ministers, tried
to base itself on the right wing of the Soviet. Socialist ministers,
coming under fire from their left wing Soviet associates, were compelled
to pursue a double-faced policy. The Provisional Government was unable
to make decisive policy decisions due to political factionalism and a
breakdown of state structures.

July crisis and second coalition government
-------------------------------------------

The July Days took place in Petrograd between July 3 and 7 (Julian
calendar) (July 16–July 20, Gregorian calendar), when soldiers and
industrial workers in the city rioted against the Provisional
Government, as advocated in Lenin's April Theses. After the rising was
put down, the Bolsheviks were blamed for it, and their leader Vladimir
Lenin went into hiding, while other leaders were arrested.

The result of the events was new protracted crisis in the Provisional
Government. "Bourgeois" ministers, belonging to the Constitutional
Democratic Party resigned, and no cabinet could be formed to the end of
the month. Finally, on August 6 (July 24) 1917, a new coalition cabinet,
composed mostly of socialists, was formed with Kerensky at its head.

Second coalition:

  Post                                              Name                   Party
  ------------------------------------------------- ---------------------- -------------------------------
  Minister-President and Minister of War and Navy   Alexander Kerensky     Socialist-Revolutionary Party
  Vice-President, Minister of Finance               Nikolai Nekrasov       
  Minister of Foreign Affairs                       Mikhail Tereshchenko   Non-party
  Minister of Internal Affairs                      Nikolai Avksentiev     Socialist-Revolutionary Party
  Minister of Transport                             Piotr Yurenev          Kadet
  Minister of Trade and Industry                    Sergei Prokopovich     Non-party
  Minister of Justice                               Alexander Zarudny      National socialists
  Minister of Education                             Sergey Oldenburg       Kadet
  Minister of Agriculture                           Victor Chernov         Socialist-Revolutionary Party
  Minister of Labour                                Matvey Skobelev        Menshevik
  Minister of Food                                  Alexey Peshekhonov     National socialists
  Minister of Health Care                           Ivan Efremov           
  Minister of Post and Telegraph                    Alexei Nikitin         Menshevik
  Ober-Procurator of the Holy Synod                 Vladimir Lvov          Progressist

Third coalition
---------------

From October 8 (September 25), 1917.

  Post                                               Name                   Party
  -------------------------------------------------- ---------------------- -------------------------------
  Minister-President                                 Alexander Kerensky     Socialist-Revolutionary Party
  Vice-President, Minister of Trade and Industry     Alexander Konovalov    Kadets
  Minister of Foreign Affairs                        Mikhail Tereshchenko   Non-party
  Minister of Internal Affairs, Post and Telegraph   Alexei Nikitin         Menshevik
  Minister of War                                    Alexander Verkhovsky   
  Minister of Navy                                   Dmitry Verderevsky     
  Minister of Finance                                Mikhail Bernatsky      
  Minister of Justice                                Pavel Malyantovitch    Menshevik
  Minister of Transport                              Alexander Liverovsky   Non-party
  Minister of Education                              Sergei Salazkin        Non-party
  Minister of Agriculture                            Semen Maslov           Socialist-Revolutionary Party
  Minister of Labour                                 Kuzma Gvozdev          Menshevik
  Minister of Food                                   Sergei Prokopovich     Non-party
  Minister of Health Care                            Nikolai Kishkin        Kadet
  Minister of Post and Telegraph                     Alexei Nikitin         Menshevik
  Minister of Religion                               Anton Kartashev        Kadet

Legislative policies and problems
---------------------------------

With the 1917 February Revolution, tsar Nicholas II’s abdication, and
the formation of a completely new Russian state, Russia’s political
spectrum dramatically altered. The tsarist leadership represented an
authoritarian, conservative form of governance. The Kadet Party (see
Constitutional Democratic Party), composed mostly of liberal
intellectuals, formed the greatest opposition to the tsarist regime
leading up to the February Revolution. The Kadets transformed from an
opposition force into a role of established leadership, as the former
opposition party held most of the power in the new Provisional
Government, which replaced the tsarist regime. The February Revolution
was also accompanied by further politicization of the masses.
Politicization of working people led to the leftward shift of the
political spectrum.

Many urban workers originally supported the socialist Menshevik Party
(see Menshevik), while some, though a small minority in February,
favored the more radical Bolshevik Party (see Bolshevik). The Mensheviks
often supported the actions of the Provisional Government and believed
that the existence of such a government was a necessary step to achieve
Communism. On the other hand, the Bolsheviks violently opposed the
Provisional Government and desired a more rapid transition to Communism.
In the countryside, political ideology also shifted leftward, with many
peasants supporting the Socialist Revolutionary Party (see
Socialist-Revolutionary Party). The SRs advocated a form of agrarian
socialism and land policy that the peasantry overwhelmingly supported .
For the most part, urban workers supported the Mensheviks and Bolsheviks
(with greater numbers supporting the Bolsheviks as 1917 progressed),
while the peasants supported the Socialist Revolutionaries. The rapid
development and popularity of these leftist parties turned
moderate-liberal parties, such as the Kadets, into “new conservatives.”
The Provisional Government was mostly composed of “new conservatives,”
and the new government faced tremendous opposition from the left.

Opposition was most obvious with the development and dominance of the
Petrograd Soviet, which represented the socialist views of leftist
parties. A dual power structure quickly arose consisting of the
Provisional Government and the Petrograd Soviet. While the Provisional
Government retained the formal authority to rule over Russia, the
Petrograd Soviet maintained actual power. With its control over the army
and the railroads, the Petrograd Soviet had the means to enforce
policies. The Provisional Government lacked the ability to administer
its policies. In fact, local soviets, political organizations mostly of
socialists, often maintained discretion when deciding whether or not to
implement the Provisional Government’s laws.

Despite its short reign of power and implementation shortcomings, the
Provisional Government passed very progressive legislation. The policies
enacted by this moderate government (by 1917 Russian standards)
represented arguably the most liberal legislation in Europe at the time.
The independence of Church from state, the emphasis on rural self
governance, and the affirmation of fundamental civil rights (such as
freedom of speech, press, and assembly) that the tsarist government had
periodically restricted shows the progressivism of the Provisional
Government. Other policies included the abolition of capital punishment
and economic redistribution in the countryside. The Provisional
Government also granted more freedoms to previously suppressed regions
of the Russian Empire. Poland was granted independence and Lithuania and
Ukraine became more autonomous.

The main obstacle and problem of the Provisional Government was its
inability to enforce and administer legislative policies. Foreign policy
was the one area in which the Provisional Government was able to
exercise its discretion to a great extent. However, the continuation of
aggressive foreign policy (for example, the Kerensky Offensive)
increased opposition to the government. Domestically, the Provisional
Government’s weaknesses were blatant. The dual power structure was in
fact dominated by one side, the Petrograd Soviet. Minister of War
Alexander Guchkov stated that “We (the Provisional Government) do not
have authority, but only the appearance of authority; the real power
lies with the Soviet”. Severe limitations existed on the Provisional
Government's ability to rule.

While it was true that the Provisional Government lacked enforcement
ability, prominent members within the Government encouraged bottom-up
rule. Politicians such as Prime Minister Georgy Lvov favored devolution
of power to decentralized organizations. The Provisional Government did
not desire the complete decentralization of power, but certain members
definitely advocated more political participation by the masses in the
form of grassroots mobilization.

Democratization
---------------

The rise of local organizations, such as trade unions and rural
institutions, and the devolution of power within Russian government gave
rise to democratization. It is difficult to say that the Provisional
Government desired the rise of these powerful, local institutions. As
stated in the previous section, some politicians within the Provisional
Government advocated the rise of these institutions. Local government
bodies had discretionary authority when deciding which Provisional
Government laws to implement. For example, institutions that held power
in rural areas were quick to implement national laws regarding the
peasantry’s use of idle land. Real enforcement power was in the hands of
these local institutions and the soviets. Russian historian W.E. Mosse
points out, this time period represented “the only time in modern
Russian history when the Russian people were able to play a significant
part in the shaping of their destinies”. While this quote romanticizes
Russian society under the Provisional Government, the quote nonetheless
shows that important democratic institutions were prominent in 1917
Russia.

Special interest groups also developed throughout 1917. Special interest
groups play a large role in every society deemed “democratic” today, and
such was the case of Russia in 1917. Many on the far left would argue
that the presence of special interest groups represent a form of
bourgeois democracy, in which the interests of an elite few are
represented to a greater extent than the working masses. The rise of
special interest organizations gave people the means to mobilize and
play a role in the democratic process. While groups such as trade unions
formed to represent the needs of the working classes, professional
organizations were also prominent. Professional organizations quickly
developed a political side to represent member’s interests. The
political involvement of these groups represents a form of democratic
participation as the government listened to such groups when formulating
policy. Such interest groups played a negligible role in politics before
February, 1917 and after October, 1917.

While professional special interest groups were on the rise, so too were
worker organizations, especially in the cities. Beyond the formation of
trade unions, factory committees of workers rapidly developed on the
plant level of industrial centers. The factory committees represented
the most radical viewpoints of the time period. The Bolsheviks gained
their popularity within these institutions. Nonetheless, these
committees represented the most democratic element of 1917 Russia.
However, this form of democracy differed from and went beyond the
political democracy advocated by the liberal intellectual elites and
moderate socialists of the Provisional Government. Workers established
economic democracy, as employees gained managerial power and direct
control over their workplace. Worker self-management became a common
practice throughout industrial enterprises. As workers became more
militant and gained more economic power, they supported the radical
Bolshevik party and lifted the Bolsheviks into power in October, 1917.
However, the Bolsheviks envisioned party-led control of the economy.
Therefore, worker self-management, the ultimate form of economic
democracy, disappeared when the Bolsheviks gained control of Russia.

Kornilov affair
---------------

The Kornilov affair in August 1917 became the last nail in the coffin of
the Provisional Government. Due to the extreme weakness of the
government at this point, there was talk among the elites of bolstering
its power by including the Commander-in-chief of Russian army Lavr
Kornilov as a military dictator on the side of Kerensky. The extent to
which this deal had indeed been accepted by all parties is still
unclear. What is clear, however, is that when Kornilov's troops
approached Petrograd, Kerensky branded them as counter-revolutionaries
and demanded their arrest. This move can be seen as an attempt to
bolster his own power by making him a defender of the revolution against
a Napoleon-type figure. However, it had terrible consequences, as
Kerensky's move was seen in the army as a betrayal of Kornilov, making
them finally disloyal to the Provisional Government. Furthermore, as
Kornilov's troops were arrested by the now armed Red Guard, it was the
Soviet that was seen to have saved the country from military
dictatorship. In order to defend himself and Petrograd, he provided the
Bolsheviks with arms as he had little support from the army. When
Kornilov did not attack Kerensky, the Bolsheviks did not return their
weapons, making them a greater concern to Kerensky and the Provisional
Government.

The October Revolution
----------------------

Image:Milrevkom proclamation.jpg|thumb|right|Milrevcom proclamation
about the overthrowing of the Provisional Government On October 25–26 –
by the Julian Calendar, whose use has since been discontinued in Russia
– Red Guard forces under the leadership of Bolshevik commanders launched
their final attack on the ineffectual Provisional Government. Most
government offices were occupied and controlled by Bolshevik soldiers on
the 25th; the last holdout of the Provisional Ministers, the Tsar's
Winter Palace on the Neva River bank, was captured on the night of the
26th. Kerensky escaped the Winter Palace raid and fled to Pskov, where
he rallied some loyal troops for an attempt to retake the capital. His
troops managed to capture Tsarskoe Selo but were beaten the next day at
Pulkovo. Kerensky spent the next few weeks in hiding before fleeing the
country. He went into exile in France and eventually emigrated to the
U.S.

The Bolsheviks then replaced the government with their own. The *Little
Council* (or *Underground Provisional Government*) met at the house of
Sofia Panina briefly in an attempt to resist the Bolsheviks. However
this initiative ended on 28 November with the arrest of Panina, Fyodor
Kokoshkin, Andrei Ivanovich Shingarev and Prince Pavel Dolgorukov and
Panina being the subject of a political trial.

Some academics, such as Pavel Osinsky, argue that the October Revolution
was as much a function of the failures of the Provisional Government as
it was of the strength of the Bolsheviks. Osinsky described this as
“socialism by default” as opposed to “socialism by design.”

Riasanovsky argued that the Provisional Government made perhaps its
"worst mistake" by not holding elections to the Constituent Assembly
soon enough. They wasted time fine-tuning details of the election law,
while Russia slipped further into anarchy and economic chaos. By the
time the Assembly finally met, argued Riasanovsky, "the Bolsheviks had
already gained control of Russia."

Fate of the Former Ministers of the Provisional Government
----------------------------------------------------------

Most of the former ministers of the Provisional Government who did not
leave Russia were executed by the Soviet Government in the later years
or died in prisons: A.M.Nikitin (executed), A.I.Verkhovskiy (executed),
P.N.Malyantovich (executed), S.L.Maslov (executed), F.F.Kokoshkin
(brutally murdered in a prison hospital), V.N.Lvov (died in prison),
N.V.Nekrasov (executed), M.I.Skobelev (executed), A.I.Shingarev
(brutally murdered in a prison hospital), D.I.Shakhovskoy (died in a
labour camp). Others spent many years in prison: K.A.Gvozdev (spent 18
years in prison), N.M.Kishkin.

Footnotes
---------

Further reading
---------------

-   Kerensky, Alexander. [*The Catastrophe: Kerensky’s Own Story of the
    Russian
    Revolution*](http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/kerensky/1927/catastrophe/index.htm).
    New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1927.
-   Medvedev, Roi. *The October Revolution*. New York: Columbia
    University Press, 1979.
-   Nabokov, Vladimir Dmitrievich. *V.D. Nabokov and the Russian
    Provisional Government, 1917*. New Haven: Yale University Press,
    1976, Special:BookSources/0300018207|ISBN 0-300-01820-7
-   Reed, John. [*Ten Days that Shook the
    World*](http://www.marxists.org/archive/reed/1919/10days/10days/index.htm).
    New York: Boni & Liveright, 1919.
-   Riasanovsky, Nicholas. *A History of Russia (sixth edition)*. New
    York: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Category:1917 disestablishments in Russia Category:Anti-communism
Category:Russian Revolution Category:Russian Provisional Government
Category:Russian Empire in World War I
