**Russian culture** is the culture associated with the country of Russia
and, sometimes, specifically with ethnic Russians. It has a long history
and can claim a long tradition of dividend in many aspects of the arts,
especially when it comes to literature and philosophy, classical music
and ballet, architecture and painting, cinema and animation, which all
had considerable influence on world culture. The country also has a
flavorful material culture and a tradition in technology.

Russian culture started from that of the East Slavs, with their pagan
beliefs and specific way of life in the wooded areas of Eastern Europe.
Early Russian culture was much influenced by neighbouring Finno-Ugric
tribes and by nomadic, mainly Turkic, peoples of the Pontic steppe. In
the late 1st millennium AD the Scandinavian Vikings, or *Varangians*,
also took part in the forming of Russian identity and Kievan Rus' state.
Kievan Rus' had accepted Orthodox Christianity from the Eastern Roman
Empire in 988, and this largely defined the Russian culture of next
millennium as the synthesis of Slavic and Byzantine cultures. After the
fall of Constantinople in 1453, Russia remained the largest Orthodox
nation in the world and claimed succession to the Byzantine legacy in
the form of the Third Rome idea. At different points in its history, the
country was also strongly influenced by the culture of Western Europe.
Since Peter the Great's reforms for two centuries Russian culture
largely developed in the general context of European culture rather than
pursuing its own unique ways. The situation changed in the 20th century,
when the Communist ideology became a major factor in the culture of the
Soviet Union, where Russia, or Russian SFSR, was the largest and leading
part.

Nowadays, Russian cultural heritage is ranked seventh in the Nation
Brands Index, based on interviews of some 20,000 people mainly from
Western countries and the Far East. That's with the fact, that due to
the relatively late involvement of Russia in modern globalization and
international tourism, many aspects of Russian culture, like Russian
jokes and the Soviet Art, remain largely unknown to foreigners.

Language
--------

Russia's 160 ethnic groups speak some 100 languages. According to the
2002 census, 142.6 million people speak Russian, followed by Tatar with
5.3 million and Ukrainian with 1.8 million speakers. Russian is the only
official state language, but the Constitution gives the individual
republics the right to make their native language co-official next to
Russian. Despite its wide dispersal, the Russian language is homogeneous
throughout Russia. Russian is the most geographically widespread
language of Eurasia and the most widely spoken Slavic language. Russian
belongs to the Indo-European language family and is one of the living
members of the East Slavic languages; the others being Belarusian and
Ukrainian (and possibly Rusyn). Written examples of Old East Slavic
(*Old Russian*) are attested from the 10th century onwards.

Over a quarter of the world's scientific literature is published in
Russian. Russian is also applied as a means of coding and storage of
universal knowledge—60–70% of all world information is published in the
English and Russian languages. The language is one of the six official
languages of the United Nations.

### Folklore

Old Russian folklore takes its roots in the pagan beliefs of ancient
Slavs and now is represented in the Russian fairy tales. Epic Russian
bylinas are also an important part of Slavic mythology. The oldest
bylinas of Kievan cycle were actually recorded mostly in the Russian
North, especially in Karelia, where most of the Finnish national epic
Kalevala was recorded as well.

Many Russian fairy tales and bylinas were adapted for animation films,
or for feature movies by famous directors like Aleksandr Ptushko (*Ilya
Muromets*, *Sadko*) and Aleksandr Rou (*Morozko*, *Vasilisa the
Beautiful*). Some Russian poets, including Pyotr Yershov and Leonid
Filatov, created a number of well-known poetical interpretations of
classical Russian fairy tales, and in some cases, like that of Alexander
Pushkin, also created fully original fairy tale poems that became very
popular.

Folklorists today consider the 1920s the Soviet Union’s golden age of
folklore. The struggling new government, which had to focus its efforts
on establishing a new administrative system and building up the nation’s
backwards economy, could not be bothered with attempting to control
literature, so studies of folklore thrived. There were two primary
trends of folklore study during the decade: the formalist and Finnish
schools. Formalism focused on the artistic form of ancient byliny and
faerie tales, specifically their use of distinctive structures and
poetic devices. The Finnish school was concerned with connections
amongst related legends of various Eastern European regions. Finnish
scholars collected comparable tales from multiple locales and analyzed
their similarities and differences, hoping to trace these epic stories’
migration paths.

Once Joseph Stalin came to power and put his First Five Year Plan into
motion in 1928, the Soviet government began to criticize and censor
folklore studies. Stalin and the Soviet regime repressed folklore,
believing that it supported the old tsarist system and a capitalist
economy. They saw it as a reminder of the backward Russian society that
the Bolsheviks were working to surpass. To keep folklore studies in
check and prevent "inappropriate" ideas from spreading amongst the
masses, the government created the RAPP – the Russian Association of
Proletarian Writers. The RAPP specifically focused on censoring fairy
tales and children’s literature, believing that fantasies and “bourgeois
nonsense” harmed the development of upstanding Soviet citizens. Fairy
tales were removed from bookshelves and children were encouraged to read
books focusing on nature and science. RAPP eventually increased its
levels of censorship and became the Union of Soviet Writers in 1932.

In order to continue researching and analyzing folklore, intellectuals
needed to justify its worth to the Communist regime. Otherwise,
collections of folklore, along with all other literature deemed useless
for the purposes of Stalin’s Five Year Plan, would be an unacceptable
realm of study. In 1934, Maksim Gorky gave a speech to the Union of
Soviet Writers arguing that folklore could, in fact, be consciously used
to promote Communist values. Apart from expounding on the artistic value
of folklore, he stressed that traditional legends and fairy tales showed
ideal, community-oriented characters, which exemplified the model Soviet
citizen. Folklore, with many of its conflicts based on the struggles of
a labor-oriented lifestyle, was relevant to Communism as it could not
have existed without the direct contribution of the working classes.
Also, Gorky explained that folklore characters expressed high levels of
optimism, and therefore could encourage readers to maintain a positive
mindset, especially as their lives changed with the further development
of Communism.

Iurii Sokolov, the head of the folklore section of the Union of Soviet
Writers also promoted the study of folklore by arguing that folklore had
originally been the oral tradition of the working people, and
consequently could be used to motivate and inspire collective projects
amongst the present-day proletariat. Characters throughout traditional
Russian folktales often found themselves on a journey of self-discovery,
a process that led them to value themselves not as individuals, but
rather as a necessary part of a common whole. The attitudes of such
legendary characters paralleled the mindset that the Soviet government
wished to instill in its citizens. He also pointed out the existence of
many tales that showed members of the working class outsmarting their
cruel masters, again working to prove folklore’s value to Soviet
ideology and the nation’s society at large. Convinced by Gorky and
Sokolov's arguments, the Soviet government and the Union of Soviet
Writers began collecting and evaluating folklore from across the
country. The Union handpicked and recorded particular stories that, in
their eyes, sufficiently promoted the collectivist spirit and showed the
Soviet regime’s benefits and progress. It then proceeded to redistribute
copies of approved stories throughout the population. Meanwhile, local
folklore centers arose in all major cities. Responsible for advocating a
sense of Soviet nationalism, these organizations ensured that the media
published appropriate versions of Russian folktales in a systematic
fashion.

Apart from circulating government-approved fairy tales and byliny that
already existed, during Stalin’s rule authors parroting appropriate
Soviet ideologies wrote Communist folktales and introduced them to the
population. These contemporary folktales combined the structures and
motifs of the old byliny with contemporary life in the Soviet Union.
Called noviny, these new tales were considered the renaissance of the
Russian epic. Folklorists were called upon to teach modern folksingers
the conventional style and structure of the traditional byliny. They
also explained to the performers the appropriate types of Communist
ideology that should be represented in the new stories and songs As the
performers of the day were often poorly educated, they needed to obtain
a thorough understanding of Marxist ideology before they could be
expected to impart folktales to the public in a manner that suited the
Soviet government. Besides undergoing extensive education, many folk
performers traveled throughout the nation in order to gain insight into
the lives of the working class, and thus communicate their stories more
effectively. Due to their crucial role in spreading Communist ideals
throughout the Soviet Union, eventually some of these performers became
highly valued members of Soviet society. A number of them, despite their
illiteracy, were even elected as members of the Union of Soviet Writers.

These new Soviet fairy tales and folk songs primarily focused on the
contrasts between a miserable life in old tsarist Russia and an improved
one under Stalin’s leadership. Their characters represented identities
for which Soviet citizens should strive, exemplifying the traits of the
“New Soviet Man.” The heroes of Soviet tales were meant to portray a
transformed and improved version of the average citizen, giving the
reader a clear goal for an ideal community-oriented self that the future
he or she was meant to become. These new folktales replaced magic with
technology, and supernatural forces with Stalin. Instead of receiving
essential advice from a mythical being, the protagonist would be given
advice from omniscient Stalin. If the character followed Stalin’s divine
advice, he could be assured success in all his endeavors and a complete
transformation into the “New Soviet Man.” The villains of these
contemporary fairy tales were the Whites and their leader Idolisce, “the
most monstrous idol,” who was the equivalent of the tsar. Descriptions
of the Whites in noviny mirrored those of the Tartars in byliny. In
these new stories, the Whites were incompetent, stagnant capitalists,
while the Soviet citizens became invincible heroes.

Once Stalin died in March 1953, folklorists of the period quickly
abandoned the new folktales. Written by individual authors and
performers, noviny did not come from the oral traditions of the working
class. Consequently, today they are considered pseudo-folklore, rather
than genuine Soviet (or Russian) folklore. Without any true connection
to the masses, there was no reason noviny should be considered anything
other than contemporary literature. Specialists decided that attempts to
represent contemporary life through the structure and artistry of the
ancient epics could not be considered genuine folklore. Stalin’s name
has been omitted from the few surviving pseudo-folktales of the period.
Instead of considering folklore under Stalin a renaissance of the
traditional Russian epic, today it is generally regarded as a period of
restraint and falsehood.

### Literature

Russian literature is considered to be among the most influential and
developed in the world, with some of the most famous literary works
belonging to it. Russia's literary history dates back to the 10th
century; in the 18th century its development was boosted by the works of
Mikhail Lomonosov and Denis Fonvizin, and by the early 19th century a
modern native tradition had emerged, producing some of the greatest
writers of all time. This period and the Golden Age of Russian Poetry
began with Alexander Pushkin, considered to be the founder of modern
Russian literature and often described as the *"Russian Shakespeare" or
the "Russian Goethe"*. It continued in the 19th century with the poetry
of Mikhail Lermontov and Nikolay Nekrasov, dramas of Aleksandr Ostrovsky
and Anton Chekhov, and the prose of Nikolai Gogol, Ivan Turgenev, Leo
Tolstoy, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin, Ivan Goncharov,
Aleksey Pisemsky and Nikolai Leskov. Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky in
particular were titanic figures, to the point that many literary critics
have described one or the other as the greatest novelist ever.

By the 1880s Russian literature had begun to change. The age of the
great novelists was over and short fiction and poetry became the
dominant genres of Russian literature for the next several decades,
which later became known as the Silver Age of Russian Poetry. Previously
dominated by realism, Russian literature came under strong influence of
symbolism in the years between 1893 and 1914. Leading writers of this
age include Valery Bryusov, Andrei Bely, Vyacheslav Ivanov, Aleksandr
Blok, Nikolay Gumilev, Dmitry Merezhkovsky, Fyodor Sologub, Anna
Akhmatova, Osip Mandelstam, Marina Tsvetaeva, Leonid Andreyev, Ivan
Bunin, and Maxim Gorky.

Following the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing civil war,
Russian cultural life was left in chaos. Some prominent writers, like
Ivan Bunin and Vladimir Nabokov left the country, while a new generation
of talented writers joined together in different organizations with the
aim of creating a new and distinctive working-class culture appropriate
for the new state, the Soviet Union. Throughout the 1920s writers
enjoyed broad tolerance. In the 1930s censorship over literature was
tightened in line with Joseph Stalin's policy of socialist realism.
After his death the restrictions on literature were eased, and by the
1970s and 1980s, writers were increasingly ignoring official guidelines.
The leading authors of the Soviet era included Yevgeny Zamiatin, Isaac
Babel, Vladimir Mayakovsky, Ilf and Petrov, Yury Olesha, Mikhail
Bulgakov, Boris Pasternak, Mikhail Sholokhov, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn,
Yevgeny Yevtushenko, and Andrey Voznesensky.

Soviet era was also the golden age of Russian Science fiction, that was
initially inspired by western authors and enthusiastically developed
with the success of Soviet space program. Authors like Arkady and Boris
Strugatsky, Kir Bulychov, Ivan Yefremov, Alexander Belayev enjoyed
mainstream popularity at the time.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  align=center |Pushkin\       align=center |Gogol\         align=center |Turgenev\      align=center |Dostoevsky\    align=center |Tolstoy\       align=center |Chekhov\       align=center |Bulgakov\
  <small>(1799–1837)</small>   <small>(1809–1852)</small>   <small>(1818–1883)</small>   <small>(1821–1881)</small>   <small>(1828–1910)</small>   <small>(1860–1904)</small>   <small>(1891–1940)</small>
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ----------------------------
  align=left |
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Philosophy

Some Russian writers, like Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky, are known also as
philosophers, while many more authors are known primarily for their
philosophical works. Russian philosophy blossomed since the 19th
century, when it was defined initially by the opposition of
Westernizers, advocating Russia's following the Western political and
economical models, and Slavophiles, insisting on developing Russia as a
unique civilization. The latter group includes Nikolai Danilevsky and
Konstantin Leontiev, the early founders of eurasianism.

In its further development, Russian philosophy was always marked by a
deep connection to literature and interest in creativity, society,
politics and nationalism; cosmos and religion were other primary
subjects. Notable philosopheres of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries include Vladimir Solovyov, Sergei Bulgakov, Pavel Florensky,
Nikolai Berdyaev, Vladimir Lossky and Vladimir Vernadsky. In the 20th
century Russian philosophy became dominated by Marxism.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  align=center |Bakunin\       align=center |Kropotkin\     align=center |Solovyov\      align=center |Shestov\       align=center |Berdyaev\
  <small>(1814–1876)</small>   <small>(1842–1921)</small>   <small>(1853–1900)</small>   <small>(1866–1938)</small>   <small>(1874–1948)</small>
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ----------------------------
  align=left |
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Humour

Russia owes much of its wit to the great flexibility and richness of the
Russian language, allowing for puns and unexpected associations. As with
any other nation, its vast scope ranges from lewd jokes and silly word
play to political satire.

Russian jokes, the most popular form of Russian humour, are short
fictional stories or dialogues with a punch line. Russian joke culture
features a series of categories with fixed and highly familiar settings
and characters. Surprising effects are achieved by an endless variety of
plots. Russians love jokes on topics found everywhere in the world, be
it politics, spouse relations, or mothers-in-law.

Chastushka, a type of traditional Russian poetry, is a single quatrain
in trochaic tetrameter with an "abab" or "abcb" rhyme scheme. Usually
humorous, satirical, or ironic in nature, chastushkas are often put to
music as well, usually with balalaika or accordion accompaniment. The
rigid, short structure (and to a lesser degree, the type of humor these
use) parallels limericks. The name originates from the Russian word
*части́ть*, meaning "to speak fast."

Visual arts
-----------

### Architecture

Russian architecture began with the woodcraft buildings of ancient
Slavs. Since the Christianization of Kievan Rus', for several centuries
Russian architecture was influenced predominantly by the Byzantine
architecture, until the Fall of Constantinople. Apart from
fortifications (kremlins), the main stone buildings of ancient Rus' were
Orthodox churches, with their many domes, often gilded or brightly
painted. Aristotle Fioravanti and other Italian architects brought
Renaissance trends into Russia. The 16th century saw the development of
unique tent-like churches culminating in Saint Basil's Cathedral. By
that time the onion dome design was also fully developed. In the 17th
century, the "fiery style" of ornamentation flourished in Moscow and
Yaroslavl, gradually paving the way for the Naryshkin baroque of the
1690s. After Peter the Great reforms had made Russia much closer to
Western culture, the change of the architectural styles in the country
generally followed that of Western Europe.

The 18th-century taste for rococo architecture led to the splendid works
of Bartolomeo Rastrelli and his followers. During the reign of Catherine
the Great and her grandson Alexander I, the city of Saint Petersburg was
transformed into an outdoor museum of Neoclassical architecture. The
second half of the 19th century was dominated by the Byzantine and
Russian Revival style (this corresponds to Gothic Revival in Western
Europe). Prevalent styles of the 20th century were the Art Nouveau
(Fyodor Shekhtel), Constructivism (Moisei Ginzburg and Victor Vesnin),
and the Stalin Empire style (Boris Iofan). After Stalin's death a new
Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, condemned the "excesses" of the former
architectural styles, and in the late Soviet era the architecture of the
country was dominated by plain functionalism. This helped somewhat to
resolve the housing problem, but created the large massives of buildings
of low architectural quality, much in contrast with the previous bright
architecture. After the end of the Soviet Union the situation improved.
Many churches demolished in the Soviet times were rebuilt, and this
process continues along with the restoration of various historical
buildings destroyed in World War II. As for the original architecture,
there is no more any common style in modern Russia, though International
style has a great influence.

Some notable Russian buildings include:

-   Saint Sophia Cathedral in Novgorod | Golden Gate (Vladimir) |
    Cathedral of Christ the Saviour | Assumption Cathedral in Vladimir |
    Cathedral of the Annunciation | Cathedral of the Archangel |
    Cathedral of the Dormition | Church of the Savior on Blood | Saint
    Basil's Cathedral | Kazan Kremlin | Saint Isaac's Cathedral | Kazan
    Cathedral | Peter and Paul Cathedral | Sukharev Tower | Menshikov
    Tower | Moscow Manege | Narva Triumphal Gate | Kolomenskoye |
    Peterhof Palace | Gatchina | Troitse-Sergiyeva Lavra | Solovetsky
    Monastery | Kunstkamera | Russian Museum | Catherine Palace | Grand
    Kremlin Palace | Winter Palace | Simonov Monastery | Novodevichy
    Convent | Lenin's Mausoleum | Tatlin's Tower | Palace of the Soviets
    | Seven Sisters (Moscow) | All-Soviet Exhibition Centre | Ostankino
    Tower | Triumph-Palace | White House of Russia

### Handicraft

Matryoshka doll is a Russian nesting doll. A set of Matryoshka dolls
consist of a wooden figure which can be pulled apart to reveal another
figure of the same sort inside. It has in turn another figure inside,
and so on. The number of nested figures is usually six or more. The
shape is mostly cylindrical, rounded at the top for the head and tapered
towards the bottom, but little else. The dolls have no extremities,
(except those that are painted). The true artistry is in the painting of
each doll, which can be extremely elaborate. The theme is usually
peasant girls in traditional dress, but can be almost anything; for
instance, fairy tales or Soviet leaders.

Other forms of Russian handicraft include khokhloma, Dymkovo toy, gzhel,
Zhostovo painting, Filimonov toys, pisanka and palekh.

### Icon painting

Russian icons are typically paintings on wood, often small, though some
in churches and monasteries may be as large as a table top. Many
religious homes in Russia have icons hanging on the wall in the *krasny
ugol*, the "red" or "beautiful" corner (see Icon Corner). There is a
rich history and elaborate religious symbolism associated with icons. In
Russian churches, the nave is typically separated from the sanctuary by
an *iconostasis* (Russian *ikonostás*) a wall of icons. Icon paintings
in Russia attempted to help people with their prayers without idolizing
the figure in the painting. The most comprehensive collection of Icon
art is found at the Tretyakov Gallery.

The use and making of icons entered Kievan Rus' following its conversion
to Orthodox Christianity from the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire in
988 AD. As a general rule, these icons strictly followed models and
formulas hallowed by usage, some of which had originated in
Constantinople. As time passed, the Russians—notably Andrei Rublev and
Dionisius—widened the vocabulary of iconic types and styles far beyond
anything found elsewhere. The personal, improvisatory and creative
traditions of Western European religious art are largely lacking in
Russia before the seventeenth century, when Simon Ushakov's painting
became strongly influenced by religious paintings and engravings from
Protestant as well as Catholic Europe.

In the mid-seventeenth century, changes in liturgy and practice
instituted by Patriarch Nikon resulted in a split in the Russian
Orthodox Church. The traditionalists, the persecuted "Old Ritualists" or
"Old Believers", continued the traditional stylization of icons, while
the State Church modified its practice. From that time icons began to be
painted not only in the traditional stylized and nonrealistic mode, but
also in a mixture of Russian stylization and Western European realism,
and in a Western European manner very much like that of Catholic
religious art of the time. The Stroganov movement and the icons from
Nevyansk rank among the last important schools of Russian icon-painting.

### Classical painting

The Russian Academy of Arts was created in 1757, aimed to give Russian
artists an international role and status. Notable portrait painters from
the Academy include Ivan Argunov, Fyodor Rokotov, Dmitry Levitzky, and
Vladimir Borovikovsky.

In the early 19th century, when neoclassicism and romantism flourished,
famous academic artists focused on mythological and Biblical themes,
like Karl Briullov and Alexander Ivanov.

### Realist painting

Realism came into dominance in the 19th century. The realists captured
Russian identity in landscapes of wide rivers, forests, and birch
clearings, as well as vigorous genre scenes and robust portraits of
their contemporaries. Other artists focused on social criticism, showing
the conditions of the poor and caricaturing authority; critical realism
flourished under the reign of Alexander II, with some artists making the
circle of human suffering their main theme. Others focused on depicting
dramatic moments in Russian history. The *Peredvizhniki* (*wanderers*)
group of artists broke with Russian Academy and initiated a school of
art liberated from Academic restrictions. Leading realists include Ivan
Shishkin, Arkhip Kuindzhi, Ivan Kramskoi, Vasily Polenov, Isaac Levitan,
Vasily Surikov, Viktor Vasnetsov and Ilya Repin.

By the turn of the 20th century and on, many Russian artists developed
their own unique styles, neither realist nor avante-garde. These include
Boris Kustodiev, Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin, Mikhail Vrubel and Nicholas
Roerich. Many works by the Peredvizhniki group of artists have been
highly sought after by collectors in recent years. Russian art auctions
during Russian Art Week in London have increased in demand and works
have been sold for record breaking prices.

### Russian avant-garde

The Russian avant-garde is an umbrella term used to define the large,
influential wave of modernist art that flourished in Russia from
approximately 1890 to 1930. The term covers many separate, but
inextricably related, art movements that occurred at the time; namely
neo-primitivism, suprematism, constructivism, rayonism, and futurism.
Notable artists from this era include El Lissitzky, Kazimir Malevich,
Wassily Kandinsky, Vladimir Tatlin, Alexander Rodchenko, Pavel Filonov
and Marc Chagall. The Russian avant-garde reached its creative and
popular height in the period between the Russian Revolution of 1917 and
1932, at which point the revolutionary ideas of the avant-garde clashed
with the newly emerged conservative direction of socialist realism.

In the 20th century many Russian artists made their careers in Western
Europe, forced to emigrate by the Revolution. Wassily Kandinsky, Marc
Chagall, Naum Gabo and others spread their work, ideas, and the impact
of Russian art globally.

### Soviet Art

During the Russian Revolution a movement was initiated to put all arts
to service of the dictatorship of the proletariat. The instrument for
this was created just days before the October Revolution, known as
Proletkult, an abbreviation for "Proletarskie kulturno-prosvetitelnye
organizatsii" (Proletarian Cultural and Enlightenment Organizations). A
prominent theorist of this movement was Alexander Bogdanov. Initially,
Narkompros (ministry of education), which was also in charge of the
arts, supported Proletkult. Although Marxist in character, the
Proletkult gained the disfavor of many party leaders, and by 1922 it had
declined considerably. It was eventually disbanded by Stalin in 1932.
*De facto* restrictions on what artists could paint were abandoned by
the late 1980s.

However, in the late Soviet era many artists combined innovation with
socialist realism including Ernst Neizvestny, Ilya Kabakov, Mikhail
Shemyakin, Erik Bulatov, and Vera Mukhina. They employed techniques as
varied as primitivism, hyperrealism, grotesque, and abstraction. Soviet
artists produced works that were furiously patriotic and anti-fascist in
the 1940s. After the Great Patriotic War Soviet sculptors made multiple
monuments to the war dead, marked by a great restrained solemnity.

Performance arts
----------------

### Folk Music

Russians have distinctive traditions of folk music. Typical ethnic
Russian musical instruments are gusli, balalaika, zhaleika, balalaika
contrabass, bayan accordion, Gypsy guitar and garmoshka. Folk music had
great influence on the Russian classical composers, and in modern times
it is a source of inspiration for a number of popular folk bands, most
prominent being Golden Ring, Ural's Nation Choir, Lyudmila Zykina.
Russian folk songs, as well as patriotic songs of the Soviet era,
constitute the bulk of repertoire of the world-renown Red Army choir and
other popular Russian ensembles.

### Folk Dance

**Russian Folk Dance** (Russian: Русский Народный Танец ) can generally
be broken up into two main types of dances Khorovod (Russian: Хоровод),
a circular game type dance where the participants hold hands, sing, and
the action generally happens in the middle of circle, and Plyaska
(Russian: Пляска or Плясовый), a coed circular dance that increases in
diversity and tempo, according to Bob Renfield, considered to be the
preeminent scholar on the topic. Other forms of Russian Folk Dance
include Pereplyas (Russian: Перепляс), an all-male competitive dance,
Mass Dance (Russian: Массовый пляс), an unpaired stage dance without
restrictions on age or number of participants, Group Dance (Russian:
Групповая пляска) a type of mass dance employs simple round-dance
passages, and improvisation, and types of Quadrille’s (Russian:
Кадриль), originally a French dance brought to Russia in the 18th
century.

Ethnic Russian dances include khorovod (Russian: Хоровод), barynya
(Russian: Барыня), kamarinskaya (Russian: Камаринская), kazachok
(Russian: Казачок) and chechotka (Russian: Чечётка) (a tap dance in bast
shoes and with a bayan).Troika (Russian: Тройка) A dance with one man
and two women, named after the traditional Russian carriage which is led
by three horses. Bear Dance or dancing with bears (Russian: Танец С
Медведем) Dates back to 907 when Great Russian Prince Oleg, in
celebration of his victory over the Greeks in Kiev, had as
entertainment, 16 male dancers dress as bears and four bears dress as
dancers . Dances with dancers dressed as bears are a reoccurring theme,
as seen a recording of the Omsk Russian Folk Chorus.

### Classical music

Music in 19th century Russia was defined by the tension between
classical composer Mikhail Glinka along with the other members of The
Mighty Handful, who embraced Russian national identity and added
religious and folk elements to their compositions, and the Russian
Musical Society led by composers Anton and Nikolay Rubinstein, which was
musically conservative. The later Romantic tradition of Pyotr Ilyich
Tchaikovsky, one of the greatest composers of the Romantic era, whose
music has come to be known and loved for its distinctly Russian
character as well as its rich harmonies and stirring melodies, was
brought into the 20th century by Sergei Rachmaninoff, one of the last
great champions of the Romantic style of European classical music.

World-renowned composers of the 20th century included Alexander
Scriabin, Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Rachmaninoff, Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri
Shostakovich and Georgy Sviridov. During most of the Soviet Era, music
was highly scrutinized and kept within a conservative, accessible idiom
in conformity with the policy of socialist realism.

Soviet and Russian conservatories have turned out generations of
world-renowned soloists. Among the best known are violinists David
Oistrakh and Gidon Kremer; cellist Mstislav Rostropovich; pianists
Vladimir Horowitz, Sviatoslav Richter, and Emil Gilels; and vocalists
Fyodor Shalyapin, Galina Vishnevskaya, Anna Netrebko and Dmitry
Hvorostovsky.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  align=center |Glinka\        align=center |Mussorgsky\    align=center |Tchaikovsky\   align=center |Rimsky-Korsakov\   align=center |Rachmaninoff\   align=center |Stravinsky\    align=center |Shostakovich\
  <small>(1804–1857)</small>   <small>(1839–1881)</small>   <small>(1840–1893)</small>   <small>(1844–1908)</small>       <small>(1873–1943)</small>    <small>(1882–1971)</small>   <small>(1906–1975)</small>
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- -------------------------------- ----------------------------- ---------------------------- -----------------------------
  align=left |
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ballet

The original purpose of the ballet in Russia was to entertain the
imperial court. The first ballet company was the Imperial School of
Ballet in St. Petersburg in the 1740s. The Ballets Russes was a ballet
company founded in the 1909 by Sergey Diaghilev, an enormously important
figure in the Russian ballet scene. Diaghilev and his Ballets Russes'
travels abroad profoundly influenced the development of dance worldwide.
The headquarters of his ballet company was located in Paris, France. A
protégé of Diaghileve, George Balanchine, founded the New York City
Ballet Company in 1948.

During the early 20th century, Russian ballet dancers Anna Pavlova and
Vaslav Nijinsky rose to fame. Soviet ballet preserved the perfected 19th
century traditions, and the Soviet Union's choreography schools produced
one internationally famous star after another, including Maya
Plisetskaya, Rudolf Nureyev, and Mikhail Baryshnikov. The Bolshoi Ballet
in Moscow and the Mariinsky in Saint Petersburg remain famous throughout
the world.

### Opera

The first known opera made in Russia was *A Life for the Tsar* by
Mikhail Glinka in 1836. This was followed by several operas such as
*Ruslan and Lyudmila* in 1842. Russian opera was originally a
combination of Russian folk music and Italian opera. After the October
revolution many opera composers left Russia. Russia's most popular
operas include: *Boris Godunov*, *Eugene Onegin*, *The Golden Cockerel*,
*Prince Igor*, and *The Queen of Spades*.

### Modern music

Since the late Soviet times Russia has experienced another wave of
Western cultural influence, which led to the development of many
previously unknown phenomena in the Russian culture. The most vivid
example, perhaps, is the Russian rock music, which takes its roots both
in the Western rock and roll and heavy metal, and in traditions of the
Russian bards of Soviet era, like Vladimir Vysotsky and Bulat Okudzhava.
Saint-Petersburg (former Leningrad), Yekaterinburg (former Sverdlovsk)
and Omsk became the main centers of development of the rock music.
Popular Russian rock groups include Mashina Vremeni, Slot, DDT,
Aquarium, Alisa, Kino, Nautilus Pompilius, Aria, Grazhdanskaya Oborona,
Splean and Korol i Shut. At the same time Russian pop music developed
from what was known in the Soviet times as *estrada* into full-fledged
industry, with some performers gaining international recognition, like
t.A.T.u. in the West, who have been said to be the most influential
artists to ever come out of Russia, or Vitas in China. Lubeh is a very
popular and unique group, harmoniously combining the elements of Western
rock and roll, traditional Russian folk music and military bard music,
featuring a number of rock attributes but often performing on the pop
scenes.

### Cinema

While in the industrialized nations of the West, motion pictures had
first been accepted as a form of cheap recreation and leisure for the
working class, Russian filmmaking came to prominence following the 1917
revolution when it explored editing as the primary mode of cinematic
expression. Russian and later Soviet cinema was a hotbed of invention in
the period immediately following the 1917 revolution, resulting in
world-renowned films such as *Battleship Potemkin*. Soviet-era
filmmakers, most notably Sergei Eisenstein and Andrei Tarkovsky, would
become some of the world's most innovative and influential directors.

Eisenstein was a student of filmmaker and theorist Lev Kuleshov, who
developed the groundbreaking Soviet montage theory of film editing at
the world's first film school, the All-Union Institute of
Cinematography. Dziga Vertov, whose *kino-glaz* ("film-eye") theory—that
the camera, like the human eye, is best used to explore real life—had a
huge impact on the development of documentary film making and cinema
realism. In 1932, Stalin made socialist realism the state policy; this
somewhat limited creativity, however many Soviet films in this style
were artistically successful, like *Chapaev*, *The Cranes Are Flying*,
and *Ballad of a Soldier*.

1960s and 1970s saw a greater variety of artistic styles in the Soviet
cinema. Eldar Ryazanov's and Leonid Gaidai's comedies of that time were
immensely popular, with many of the catch phrases still in use today. In
1961–1967 Sergey Bondarchuk directed an Oscar-winning film adaptation of
Tolstoy's epic *War and Peace*, which was the most expensive Soviet film
made. In 1969, Vladimir Motyl's *White Sun of the Desert* was released,
a very popular film in a genre known as 'osterns'; the film is
traditionally watched by cosmonauts before any trip into space.

The late 1980s and 1990s were a period of crisis in Russian cinema and
animation. Although Russian filmmakers became free to express
themselves, state subsidies were drastically reduced, resulting in fewer
films produced. The early years of the 21st century have brought
increased viewership and subsequent prosperity to the industry on the
back of the economy's rapid development, and production levels are
already higher than in Britain and Germany. Russia's total box-office
revenue in 2007 was \$565 million, up 37% from the previous year (by
comparison, in 1996 revenues stood at \$6 million). Russian cinema
continues to receive international recognition. *Russian Ark* (2002) was
the first feature film ever to be shot in a single take.

### Animation

Russia also has a long and rich tradition of animation, which started
already in the late Russian Empire times. Most of Russia's cartoon
production for cinema and television was created during Soviet times,
when Soyuzmultfilm studio was the largest animation producer. Soviet
animators developed a great and unmatched variety of pioneering
techniques and aesthetic styles, with prominent directors including Ivan
Ivanov-Vano, Fyodor Khitruk and Aleksandr Tatarskiy. Soviet cartoons are
still a source for many popular catch phrases, while such cartoon heroes
as Russian-style Winnie-the-Pooh, cute little Cheburashka, Wolf and Hare
from *Nu, Pogodi!* being iconic images in Russia and many surrounding
countries. The traditions of Soviet animation were developed in the past
decade by such directors as Aleksandr Petrov and studios like Melnitsa.

Media and technology
--------------------

### Radio and TV

Russia was among the first countries to introduce radio and television.
Due to the enormous size of the country Russia leads in the number of TV
broadcast stations and repeaters. There were few channels in the Soviet
time, but in the past two decades many new state-run and private-owned
radio stations and TV channels appeared. In 2005 a state-run English
language Russia Today TV started broadcasting, and its Arabic version
Rusiya Al-Yaum was launched in 2007.

### Internet

Originating from Russian :Category:Science and technology in
Russia|scientific community and telecommunication industries, a specific
Russian culture of using the Internet has been established since the
early 1990s. In the second half of 1990s, the term *Runet* was coined to
call the segment of Internet written or understood in the Russian
language. Whereas the Internet "has no boundaries", "Russian Internet"
(online communications in the Russian language) can not be localized
solely to the users residing in the Russian Federation as it includes
Russian-speaking people from all around the world. This segment includes
millions of users in other ex-USSR countries, Israel and others abroad
diasporas.

With the introduction of the Web, many social and cultural events found
reflections within the Russian Internet society. Various online
communities formed, and the most popular one grew out of the
Russian-speaking users of the California-based blogging platform
LiveJournal (which was completely bought out in December 2007 by Russian
firm SUP Fabrik). In January 2008 a LiveJournal blog of the "3rd
statesman" Sergey Mironov had appeared and he was shortly followed by
the new President Dmitry Medvedev who opened a personal video blog which
was later also expanded with a LiveJournal version.

As of late, there are scores of websites offering Russian language
content including mass media, e-commerce, search engines and so on.
Particularly notorious are the "Russian Hackers". Russian web design
studios, software and web-hosting enterprises offer a variety of
services, and the results form a sort of national digital culture.
E-commerce giants such as Google and Microsoft have their Russian
branches. In September 2007, the national domain .ru passed the
milestone of a million domain names. By the end of 2000s, VKontakte
social network became the most populated in the Runet.

### Science and innovation

At the start of the 18th century the reforms of Peter the Great (the
founder of Russian Academy of Sciences and Saint Petersburg State
University) and the work of such champions as polymath Mikhail Lomonosov
(the founder of Moscow State University) gave a great boost for
development of science and innovation in Russia. In the 19th and 20th
centuries Russia produced a large number of great :Category:Russian
scientists|scientists and inventors.

Nikolai Lobachevsky, a *Copernicus of Geometry*, developed the
non-Euclidean geometry. Dmitry Mendeleev invented the Periodic table,
the main framework of the modern chemistry. Nikolay Benardos introduced
the arc welding, further developed by Nikolay Slavyanov, Konstantin
Khrenov and other Russian engineers. Gleb Kotelnikov invented the
knapsack parachute, while Evgeniy Chertovsky introduced the pressure
suit. Pavel Yablochkov and Alexander Lodygin were great pioneers of
electrical engineering and inventors of early electric lamps.

Alexander Popov was among the inventors of radio, while Nikolai Basov
and Alexander Prokhorov were co-inventors of lasers and masers. Igor
Tamm, Andrei Sakharov and Lev Artsimovich developed the idea of tokamak
for controlled nuclear fusion and created its first prototype, which
finally led to the modern ITER project. Many famous Russian scientists
and inventors were émigrés, like Igor Sikorsky and Vladimir Zworykin,
and many foreign ones worked in Russia for a long time, like Leonard
Euler and Alfred Nobel.

The greatest Russian successes are in the field of space technology and
space exploration. Konstantin Tsiolkovsky was the father of theoretical
austronautics. His works had inspired leading Soviet rocket engineers
such as Sergey Korolyov, Valentin Glushko and many others that
contributed to the success of the Soviet space program at early stages
of the Space Race and beyond.

In 1957 the first Earth-orbiting artificial satellite, *Sputnik 1*, was
launched; in 1961 on 12 April the first human trip into space was
successfully made by Yury Gagarin; and many other Soviet and Russian
space exploration records ensued, including the first spacewalk
performed by Alexey Leonov, the first space exploration rover
*Lunokhod-1* and the first space station *Salyut 1*. Nowadays Russia is
the largest satellite launcher and the only provider of transport for
space tourism services.

Other technologies, where Russia historically leads, include nuclear
technology, aircraft production and arms industry. The creation of the
first nuclear power plant along with the first nuclear reactors for
submarines and surface ships was directed by Igor Kurchatov. NS *Lenin*
was the world's first nuclear-powered surface ship as well as the first
nuclear-powered civilian vessel, and NS *Arktika* became the first
surface ship to reach the North Pole.

A number of prominent Soviet aerospace engineers, inspired by the
theoretical works of Nikolai Zhukovsky, supervised the creation of many
dozens of models of military and civilian aircraft and founded a number
of *KBs* (*Construction Bureaus*) that now constitute the bulk of
Russian United Aircraft Corporation. Famous Russian airplanes include
the first supersonic passenger jet Tupolev Tu-144 by Alexei Tupolev, MiG
fighter aircraft series by Artem Mikoyan and Mikhail Gurevich, and Su
series by Pavel Sukhoi and his followers. MiG-15 is the world's most
produced jet aircraft in history, while MiG-21 is most produced
supersonic aircraft. During World War II era Bereznyak-Isayev BI-1 was
introduced as the first rocket-powered fighter aircraft, and Ilyushin
Il-2 bomber became the most produced military aircraft in history.
Polikarpov Po-2 *Kukuruznik* is the world's most produced biplane, and
Mil Mi-8 is the most produced helicopter.

Famous Russian battle tanks include T-34, the best tank design of World
War II, and further tanks of T-series, including T-54/55, the most
produced tank in history, first fully gas turbine tank T-80 and the most
modern Russian tank T-90. The AK-47 and AK-74 by Mikhail Kalashnikov
constitute the most widely used type of assault rifle throughout the
world – so much so that more AK-type rifles have been produced than all
other assault rifles combined. With these and other weapons Russia for a
long time has been among the world's top suppliers of arms.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  align=center |Lomonosov\     align=center |Lobachevsky\   align=center |Mendeleev\     align=center |Mechnikov\     align=center |I. Pavlov\     align=center |Korolyov\      align=center |Sakharov\
  <small>(1711–1765)</small>   <small>(1792–1856)</small>   <small>(1837–1906)</small>   <small>(1845–1916)</small>   <small>(1849–1936)</small>   <small>(1882–1971)</small>   <small>(1921–1989)</small>
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ---------------------------- ----------------------------
  align=left |
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lifestyle
---------

### National costume

Ethnic Russian clothes include kaftan, kosovorotka and ushanka for men,
sarafan and kokoshnik for women, with lapti and valenki as common shoes.

The Cossacks of Southern Russia have a separate brand of culture within
ethnic Russian, their clothes including burka and papaha, which they
share with the peoples of the Northern Caucasus.

### Cuisine

Russian cuisine widely uses fish, poultry, mushrooms, berries, and
honey. Crops of rye, wheat, barley, and millet provide the ingredients
for a plethora of breads, pancakes, cereals, kvass, beer, and vodka.
Black bread is relatively more popular in Russia if compared with the
rest of the world.

Flavourful soups and stews include shchi, borsch, ukha, solyanka and
okroshka. Smetana (a heavy sour cream) is often added to soups and
salads. Pirozhki, blini and syrniki are native types of pancakes.

Cutlets (like Chicken Kiev), pelmeni and shashlyk are popular meat
dishes, the last two being of Tatar and Caucasus origin respectively.
Popular salads include Russian Salad, vinaigrette and Dressed Herring.

### Traditions

Russian people have many traditions, most prominent being the washing in
banya, a hot steam bath somewhat similar to the sauna.

### Holidays

Russian holidays is the holidays of Russian people connected with
widespread national traditions of their carrying out. For a long time
already in Russia there was a set of remarkable holidays. People drove
round dances, sang songs, and lived not boringly. Every day, what that –
a holiday. But gradually traditions and holidays varied. In Russia there
are also state holidays.

There are eight public holidays in Russia. The New Year is the first in
calendar and in popularity. Russian New Year traditions resemble those
of the Western Christmas, with New Year Trees and gifts, and Ded Moroz
(Father Frost) playing the same role as Santa Claus. Rozhdestvo
(Orthodox Christmas) falls on 7 January, because Russian Orthodox Church
still follows the Julian (old style) calendar and all Orthodox holidays
are 13 days after Catholic ones. Another two major Christian holidays
are Paskha (Easter) and Troitsa (Trinity), but there is no need to
recognize them as public holidays since they are always celebrated on
Sunday.

Further Russian public holidays include Defender of the Fatherland Day
(23 February), which honors Russian men, especially those serving in the
army; International Women's Day (8 March), which combines the traditions
of Mother's Day and Valentine's Day; International Workers' Day (1 May),
now renamed *Spring and Labor Day*; Victory Day (9 May); Russia Day (12
June); and Unity Day (4 November), commemorating the popular uprising
which expelled the Polish-Lithuanian occupation force from Moscow in
1612. The latter is a replacement for the old Soviet holiday celebrating
October Revolution of 1917 (again, it was falling on November because of
the difference of calendars). Fireworks and outdoor concerts are common
features of all Russian public holidays.

Victory Day is the second popular holiday in Russia, it commemorates the
victory over Nazi Germany in World War II and is widely celebrated
throughout Russia. A huge military parade, hosted by the President of
the Russian Federation, is annually organized in Moscow on Red Square.
Similar parades are organized in all major Russian cities and the cities
with the status *Hero city* or *City of Military Glory*.

Other popular holidays, which are not public, include Old New Year (New
Year according to Julian Calendar on 1 January), Tatiana Day (day of
Russian students on 25 January), Maslenitsa (an old pagan holiday a week
before the Great Lent), Cosmonautics Day (a day of Yury Gagarin's first
ever human trip into space on 12 April), Ivan Kupala Day (another pagan
Slavic holiday on 7 July) and Peter and Fevronia Day (taking place on 8
July and being the Russian analogue of Valentine's Day, which focuses,
however, on the family love and fidelity). On different days in June
there are major celebrations of the end of the school year, when
graduates from schools and universities traditionally swim in the city
fountains; the local varieties of these public events include Scarlet
Sails tradition in Saint Petersburg.

### Religion

Christianity, Islam, Buddhism, and Judaism are Russia’s traditional
religions, deemed part of Russia's "historical heritage" in a law passed
in 1997. Estimates of believers widely fluctuate among sources, and some
reports put the number of non-believers in Russia as high as 16–48% of
the population. Russian Orthodoxy is the dominant religion in Russia.
95% of the registered Orthodox parishes belong to the Russian Orthodox
Church while there are a number of smaller Orthodox Churches. However,
the vast majority of Orthodox believers do not attend church on a
regular basis. Nonetheless, the church is widely respected by both
believers and nonbelievers, who see it as a symbol of Russian heritage
and culture. Smaller Christian denominations such as Roman Catholics,
Armenian Gregorians, and various Protestants exist.

The ancestors of many of today’s Russians adopted Orthodox Christianity
in the 10th century. The 2007 International Religious Freedom Report
published by the US Department of State said that approximately 100
million citizens consider themselves Russian Orthodox Christians.
According to a poll by the Russian Public Opinion Research Center, 63%
of respondents considered themselves Russian Orthodox, 6% of respondents
considered themselves Muslim and less than 1% considered themselves
either Buddhist, Catholic, Protestant or Jewish. Another 12% said they
believe in God, but did not practice any religion, and 16% said they are
non-believers.

Sports
------

Russians have been successful at a number of sports and consistently
finish in the top rankings at the Olympic Games and in other
international competitions. Combining the total medals of Soviet Union
and Russia, the country is second among all nations by number of gold
medals both at the Summer Olympics and at the Winter Olympics.

During the Soviet era, the national Olympic team placed first in the
total number of medals won at 14 of its 18 appearances; with these
performances, the USSR was the dominant Olympic power of its era. Since
the 1952 Olympic Games, Soviet and later Russian athletes have always
been in the top three for the number of gold medals collected at the
Summer Olympics.

Soviet gymnasts, track-and-field athletes, weight lifters, wrestlers,
boxers, fencers, shooters, chess players, cross country skiers,
biathletes, speed skaters and figure skaters were consistently among the
best in the world, along with Soviet basketball, handball, volleyball
and ice hockey players. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russian
athletes have continued to dominate international competitions. The 1980
Summer Olympic Games were held in Moscow while the 2014 Winter Olympics
and the 2014 Winter Paralympics will be hosted by Sochi.

Soviet Union dominated the sport of gymnastics for many years, with such
athletes as Larisa Latynina, who, until 2012, held a record of most
Olympic medals won per person and most gold Olympic medals won by a
woman. Today, Russia is leading in rhythmic gymnastics with such stars
as Alina Kabayeva, Irina Tschaschina and Yevgeniya Kanayeva.

Russian synchronized swimming is the best in the world, with almost all
gold medals having been swept by Russians at Olympics and World
Championships for more than a decade. Figure skating is another popular
sport in Russia; in the 1960s, the Soviet Union rose to become a
dominant power in figure skating, especially in pair skating and ice
dancing, and at every Winter Olympics from 1964 until 2006, a Soviet or
Russian pair has won gold, often considered the longest winning streak
in modern sports history. Since the end of the Soviet era, tennis has
grown in popularity and Russia has produced a number of famous tennis
players. Chess is also a widely popular pastime; from 1927, Soviet and
Russian chess grandmasters have held the world championship almost
continuously.

### Basketball

As the Soviet Union, Russia was traditionally very strong in basketball,
winning various Olympic tournaments, World Championships and Eurobasket.
As of 2009 they have various players in the NBA, notably Utah Jazz
forward Andrei Kirilenko, and are considered as a worldwide basketball
force. In 2007, Russia defeated world champions Spain to win Eurobasket
2007. Russian basketball clubs such as PBC CSKA Moscow (2006 and 2008
Euroleague Champions) have also had great success in European
competitions such as the Euroleague and the ULEB Cup.

### Ice hockey

Although ice hockey was only introduced during the Soviet era, the
national team soon dominated the sport internationally, winning gold at
seven of the nine Olympics and 19 of the 30 World Championships they
contested between 1954 and 1991. Russian players Valeri Kharlamov,
Sergei Makarov, Viacheslav Fetisov and Vladislav Tretiak hold four of
the six positions on the IIHF Team of the Century. As with some other
sports, the Russian ice hockey programme suffered after the breakup of
the Soviet Union, with Russia enduring a 15 year gold medal drought. At
that time many prominent Russian players made their careers in the
National Hockey League (NHL). In recent years Russia has reemerged as a
hockey power, winning back to back gold medals in the 2008 and 2009
World Championships, and overtaking Team Canada as the top ranked ice
hockey team in the world, but then lost to Canada in the quarter-finals
of the 2010 Olympics and 2010 World Junior Championship. The Kontinental
Hockey League (KHL) was founded in 2008 as a rival of the NHL.

### Bandy

Bandy, known in Russian as "hockey with a ball" and sometimes informally
as "Russian hockey" (as opposed to "Canadian hockey", an informal name
for ice hockey), is another traditionally popular ice sport, with
national league games averaging around 3,500 spectators. It's considered
a national sport. The Soviet Union national bandy team won all the World
Championships from 1957 to 1979. The Russian team is the reigning world
champion since the 2014 tournament.

### Football

During the Soviet period, Russia was also a competitive footballing
nation. Despite having fantastic players, the USSR never really managed
to assert itself as one of the major forces of international football,
although its teams won various championships (such as Euro 1960) and
reached numerous finals (such as Euro 1988). Along with ice hockey and
basketball, football is one of the most popular sports in modern Russia.
In recent years, Russian football, which downgraded in 1990-s, has
experienced a revival. Russian clubs (such as CSKA Moscow, Zenit St
Petersburg, Lokomotiv Moscow, and Spartak Moscow) are becoming
increasingly successful on the European stage (CSKA and Zenit winning
the UEFA Cup in 2005 and 2008 respectively). The Russian national
football team reached the semi-finals of Euro 2008, losing only to
eventual champions Spain.

### Martial arts

Russia has an extensive history of martial arts. Some of its best-known
forms include the fistfight, Sambo, and Systema with its derivatives
Ryabko's Systema and Retuinskih's System ROSS.

National symbols
----------------

### State symbols

State symbols of Russia include the Byzantine double-headed eagle,
combined with St. George of Moscow in the Russian coat of arms; these
symbols date from the time of the Grand Duchy of Moscow. The Russian
flag appeared in the late Tsardom of Russia period and became widely
used during the era of the Russian Empire. The current Russian national
anthem shares its music with the Soviet Anthem, though not the lyrics
(many Russians of older generations don't know the new lyrics and sing
the old ones). The Russian imperial motto *God is with us* and the
Soviet motto *Proletarians of all countries, unite!* are now obsolete
and no new motto has been officially introduced to replace them. The
Hammer and sickle and the full Soviet coat of arms are still widely seen
in Russian cities as a part of old architectural decorations. Soviet Red
Stars are also encountered, often on military equipment and war
memorials. The Soviet Red Banner is still honored, especially the Banner
of Victory of 1945.

### Unofficial symbols

The Matryoshka doll is a recognizable symbol of Russia, while the towers
of Moscow Kremlin and Saint Basil's Cathedral in Moscow are main
Russia's architectural symbols. Cheburashka is a mascot of Russian
national Olympic team. Mary, Saint Nicholas, Saint Andrew, Saint George,
Saint Alexander Nevsky, Saint Sergius of Radonezh, Saint Seraphim of
Sarov are Russia's patron saints. Chamomile is a flower that Russians
often associate with their Motherland, while birch is a national tree.
The Russian bear is an animal often associated with Russia, though this
image has Western origins and Russians themselves do not consider it as
a special symbol. The native Russian national personification is "Родина
мать" Mother Motherland (the statue of it located on the Mamay hill
"Мамаев курган" in Volgograd /former Stalingrad/), called Mother Russia
at the West.

Tourism
-------

Tourism in Russia has seen rapid growth since the late Soviet times,
first inner tourism and then international tourism as well. Rich
cultural heritage and great natural variety place Russia among the most
popular tourist destinations in the world. The country contains 23
UNESCO World Heritage Sites, while many more are on UNESCO's tentative
lists. Major tourist routes in Russia include a travel around the Golden
Ring of ancient cities, cruises on the big rivers like Volga, and long
journeys on the famous Trans-Siberian Railway. Diverse regions and
ethnic cultures of Russia offer many different food and souvenirs, and
show a great variety of traditions, like Russian banya, Tatar Sabantuy,
or Siberian shamanist rituals.

### Cultural tourism

Most popular tourist destinations in Russia are Moscow and Saint
Petersburg, the current and the former capitals of the country and great
cultural centers, recognized as World Cities. Moscow and Saint
Petersburg feature such world-renown museums as Tretyakov Gallery and
Hermitage, famous theaters like Bolshoi and Mariinsky, ornate churches
like Saint Basil's Cathedral, Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, Saint
Isaac's Cathedral and Church of the Savior on Blood, impressive
fortifications like Moscow Kremlin and Peter and Paul Fortress,
beautiful squares like Red Square and Palace Square, and streets like
Tverskaya and Nevsky Prospect. Rich palaces and parks of extreme beauty
are found in the former Template:Imperial palaces in Russia|imperial
residences in suburbs of Moscow (Kolomenskoye, Tsaritsyno) and Saint
Petersburg (Peterhof, Strelna, Oranienbaum, Gatchina, Pavlovsk Palace,
Tsarskoye Selo). Moscow contains a great variety of imressive Soviet era
buildings along with modern scyscrapers, while Saint Petersburg,
nicknamed *Venice of the North*, boasts of its classical architecture,
many rivers, channels and bridges.

Kazan, the capital of Tatarstan, shows a unique mix of Christian Russian
and Muslim Tatar cultures. The city has registered a brand *The Third
Capital of Russia*, though a number of other major Russian cities
compete for this status, like Novosibirsk, Yekaterinburg and Nizhny
Novgorod, all being major cultural centers with rich history and
prominent architecture. Veliky Novgorod, Pskov and the cities of Golden
Ring (Vladimir, Yaroslavl, Kostroma and others) have at best preserved
the architecture and the spirit of ancient and medieval Rus', and also
are among the main tourist destinations. Many old fortifications
(typically Kremlins), monasteries and churches are scattered throughout
Russia, forming its unique cultural landscape both in big cities and in
remote areas.

### Resorts and nature tourism

The warm subtropical Black Sea coast of Russia is the site for a number
of popular sea resorts, like Sochi, known for its beaches and wonderful
nature. At the same time Sochi can boast a number of major ski resorts,
like Krasnaya Polyana; the city is the host of 2014 Winter Olympics and
the 2014 Winter Paralympics. The mountains of the Northern Caucasus
contain many other popular ski resorts, like Dombay in
Karachay–Cherkessia.

The most famous natural tourist destination in Russia is lake Baikal,
named *the Blue Eye of Siberia*. This unique lake, oldest and deepest in
the world, has crystal-clean waters and is surrounded by taiga-covered
mountains.

Other popular natural destinations include Kamchatka with its volcanoes
and geysers, Karelia with its many lakes and granite rocks, Altai with
its snowy mountains and Tyva with its wild steppes.
