**Russian language proverbs** are words of wisdom created in Slavic
languages by Slavic peoples. The proverbs originated from oral history
and ancient written texts dating as far back as the 12th century. The
Russian language is replete with many hundreds of proverbs (пословица )
and sayings (поговоркa ). The proverbs express a universal concept, have
a moral lesson and provide an insight into many aspects of history,
culture, and national character of the people who created them. By the
17th century, the proverbs were collected and documented. They were
studied in the 19th and 20th centuries. Vladimir Dal was a famous
lexicographer of the Russian Empire whose collection was published in
Russian language in the late 19th century as *The Sayings and Bywords of
the Russian People,* featuring more than 30,000 entries. They continue
to endure in modern literature and folklore. Evidence of this is seen in
the collection of Russian anti-proverbs collected by Reznikov.
Image:Slavic languages.png|thumb|250px|Modern Slavic languages

Origin of Russian language proverbs
-----------------------------------

Russian became a full-fledged literary language in the 18th century in
Eastern Europe, when it finally displaced Church Slavonic language.
Russian language proverbs were first collected and documented during the
Russian Empire from the oral history of many different cultures and
nationalities.

The Russian Empire included parts of:

\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\
`  `\

Under the unification of the Soviet Union from 1922 to 1991, Russian
language continued to be the official and dominant language, displacing
the languages of the fifteen Republics of the Soviet Union. Today, the
Commonwealth of Independent States continues to use Russian language as
their working language.

Cited references
----------------
