**Russian jokes** ( (transcribed anekdoty), literally anecdotes), the
most popular form of Russian humour, are short fictional stories or
dialogs with a punch line.

Russian joke culture includes a series of categories with fixed and
highly familiar settings and characters. Surprising effects are achieved
by an endless variety of plots. Russian jokes are on topics found
everywhere in the world, including sex, politics, spouse relations, or
mothers-in-law. This article discusses Russian joke subjects that are
particular to Russian or Soviet culture.

Every category has a host of untranslatable jokes that rely on
linguistic puns, wordplay, and Russian's vocabulary of foul language.
Below, **(L)** marks jokes whose humor value *critically* depends on
untranslatable features of the Russian language.

A major subcategory is Russian political jokes.

Archetypes
----------

### Named characters

#### Standartenführer Stierlitz

**Stierlitz** is a fictional Soviet intelligence officer, portrayed by
Vyacheslav Tikhonov in the popular Soviet TV series *Seventeen Moments
of Spring*. In the jokes, Stierlitz interacts with various characters,
most prominently his nemesis Heinrich Müller (Gestapo)|Müller. Usually
two-liners spoofing the solemn style of the original voice-overs, the
plot is resolved in grotesque plays on words or in parodies of the
trains of thought and narrow escapes of the "original" Stierlitz.

-   Müller was walking through the forest when he saw two eyes staring
    at him in the darkness.\
    "Must be an owl," Müller thought.\
    "Who's an owl? You're an owl yourself!" Stierlitz thought.

-   Stierlitz opened a door. The lights went on. Stierlitz closed the
    door. The lights went out.\
    Stierlitz opened the door again. The light went back on. Stierlitz
    closed the door. The light went out again.\
    "It's a refrigerator," concluded Stierlitz.

-   Stierlitz approaches Berlin. The city is veiled in smoke from the
    fires.\
    "Must have forgotten to turn off my iron," Stierlitz thought with
    slight irritation.

-   Stierlitz wakes up in a cell.\
    "Which identity should I use?" he wonders. "Let's see. If a person
    in a black uniform walks in, I must be in Germany so I'll say I'm
    Standartenführer Stierlitz. If they wear green uniform, I'm in the
    USSR so I'll admit I'm Colonel Isayev".\
    The door opens and a person in grey uniform comes in saying, "You
    really should ease up on vodka, Comrade Tikhonov!"

-   Stierlitz walked in the forest and saw light blue spruce trees
    *(note: in Russian, the word for "spruce trees" is homonymous with
    the word for "[they] were eating", and in turn, "light blue" is a
    pejorative term for gay people)*. Upon approaching, Stierlitz
    noticed that the gays were also drinking.

#### Poruchik Rzhevsky

**Poruchik (Lieutenant) Rzhevsky** is a cavalry (hussar) officer, a
straightforward, unsophisticated, and immensely rude military type whose
rank and standing gain him entrance into disproportionately higher
society. In the aristocratic setting of high-society balls and 19th
century social sophistication with widespread use of the French
language, Rzhevsky, famous for brisk but usually unintelligent remarks,
keeps ridiculing the decorum with his vulgarities. In the jokes, he is
often seen interacting with characters from the novel *War and Peace* by
Leo Tolstoy. The name is borrowed from a character from a popular 1960s
comedy, *Hussar Ballad* (Russian — «Гусарская баллада»), bearing little
in common with the folklore hero. Some researchers point out that many
jokes of this kind are versions of 19th-century Russian army jokes, and
the film contributed to a new series of jokes about Rzhevsky.

Rzhevsky's (and supposedly all hussars') nonchalant attitude to love and
sex.

-   -   Poruchik Rzhevsky is putting his riding boots on and is about to
        take leave of a charming *demoiselle* he had met the previous
        evening. "*Mon cher* Poruchik," intones the siren, "aren't you
        forgetting about the money?" Rzhevsky turns to her and says
        proudly: "Hussars never take money!" — The latter expression
        (*Gusary deneg ne berut!*) has become a Russian catchphrase.

He also gives his best advice to other Russian gentlemen on love
matters. The Poruchik believes that the most straightforward approach is
the most effective one.

-   Kniaz Andrei Bolkonski asks Poruchik Rzhevsky: "Tell me, Poruchik,
    how did you come to be so good with the ladies? What is your
    secret?" - "It's quite *simplement*, *mon Prince*, quite
    *simplement*. I just come over and say: 'Madame, would you like to
    fuck?'" - "But Poruchik, you'll get slapped in the face for that!" -
    "*Oui*, some of them slap, but some of them fuck."

-   A series of jokes in which Rzhevsky wants to surprise the high
    society with a witticism, but messes up.
    -   Poruchik Rzhevsky asks his batman: "Stepan, there is a grand
        ball tonight. Got any new puns for me to tell there?" — "Sure,
        sir, how about this rhyme: 'Adam had Eve... right on the eve...
        of their very last day in Eden...'" — "That's a good one!".
        Later, at the ball: "*Monsieurs*, *monsieurs*! My Stepan taught
        me a funny *chanson ridicule*: 'Adam boinked Eve at dawn...'
        Pardon, not like that... 'Adam and Eve fuck through the night
        ...' Er... Hell, basically they fuck, but it was *absolutement*
        splendid in verse!"

-   A series of jokes is based on a paradox of vulgarity within the
    "high society" setting.
    -   Natasha Rostova has her first ball and dances with Pierre
        Bezukhov: "Pierre, isn't that grease on your collar?"/"Oh my,
        how could I miss such a terrible flaw in my costume, I'm totally
        destroyed" (walks away). Then she dances with Kniaz Bolkonsky:
        "Andrew, isn't there a dip of sauce on your tunic?"/ (Bolkonsky
        faints). Finally she's dancing with Rzhevsky: "Poruchik, your
        boots are all covered in mud!"/"It's not mud, it's shit. Don't
        worry, *mademoiselle*, it'll fall off once it dries up."

-   While successful narration of quite a few Russian jokes heavily
    depends on using sexual vulgarities ("Russian mat"), Rzhevsky, with
    all his vulgarity, does not use heavy *mat*. One of his favorite
    words is *arse* (which is considered rather mild among Russian
    vulgarities), and there is a series of jokes where Rzhevsky answers
    "arse" to some innocent question. (In fact it is typical of poruchik
    Rzhevsky to make anti-romantic comments in the most romantic
    situations.)
    -   Poruchik Rzhevsky and Natasha Rostova are riding horses together
        on the countryside. "Poruchik, what a beautiful meadow! Guess
        what I see there?" — "Ass, *mademoiselle*?" — "Ouch, Poruchik! I
        see chamomiles!" (Chamomiles are Russian cliche folk flowers) —
        "How romantic, *mademoiselle*! An ass amid chamomiles!.."

:   The essence of Rzhevsky's peculiarity is captured in the following
    meta-joke.
    -   Rzhevsky narrates his latest adventure to his Hussar comrades.
        "...So I am riding through this dark wood and suddenly see a
        wide, white..." — Hussars, all together: "...arse!" — "Of course
        not! A glade full of chamomiles! And right in the middle there
        is a beautiful white..." — Hussars encore: "...arse!" — "How
        vulgar of you! A mansion! So I open the door and guess what I
        see?" — Hussars, encore: "An arse!" — Poruchik, genuinely
        surprised: "How did you guess? Did I tell this story before?"

:   This topic culminates in the following joke, sometimes called "the
    ultimate Hussar joke".
    -   Countess Maria Bolkonskaya celebrates her 50th anniversary, the
        whole local Hussar regiment is invited, and the Countess boasts
        about her presents. "Cornet Obolensky presented me a lovely set
        of 50 Chinese fragrant candles. I loved them so much that I
        immediately stuck them into the 7 seven-branch candlesticks you
        see on the table. Quite fortunate numbers! Unfortunately there
        is one candle left, and I don't know where to stick it..." — The
        whole Hussar regiment takes a deep breath... And the Hussar
        Colonel barks out: "Hussars, not a word !!!"

#### Rabinovich

Image:Sholom Aleichem listens.jpg|thumb|right|Sholem Aleichem, a famous
Rabinovich **Rabinovich**, is an archetypal Russian Jew. He is a crafty,
cynical, sometimes bitter type, skeptical about the Soviet government,
often too smart for his own good and is sometimes portrayed as an
*otkaznik* (refusenik): someone who is refused permission to emigrate to
Israel.

-   Rabinovich fills out a job application form. The official is
    skeptical: "You stated that you don't have any relatives abroad, but
    you do have a brother in Israel."\
    "Yes, but *he* isn't abroad, **I** am abroad!"

-   Seeing a pompous and lavish burial of a member of the Politburo,
    Rabinovich sadly shakes his head:\
    "What a waste! With this kind of money, I could have buried the
    entire Politburo!"

-   Rabinovich calls Pamyat headquarters, speaking with a characteristic
    accent:\
    "Tell me, is it true that Jews sold out Russia?"\
    "Yes, of course it's true, Kike-schnabel!"\
    "Oh good! Could you please tell me where I should go to get my
    share?"

This following example explains Vladimir Putin's remark about "comrade
wolf" in relation to the politics of the United States that many
non-Russians found cryptic:

-   Rabinovich is walking through the forest with a sheep, when both of
    them stumble into a pit. A few minutes later, a wolf also falls into
    the pit. The sheep gets nervous and starts bleating.\
    "What's with all the *baaahh, baaahh*?" Rabinovich asks, "Comrade
    wolf knows whom to eat."

#### Vovochka

**Vovochka** is the Russian equivalent of Little Johnny. He interacts
with his school teacher, Maria Ivanovna (shortened to *Marivanna*; a
stereotypical teacher's name). "Vovochka" is a diminutive form of
Vladimir, creating the "little boy" effect. His fellow students bear
similarly diminutive names. This "little boy" name is used in contrast
with Vovochka's wisecracking, adult, often obscene statements.

-   In biology class, the teacher draws a cucumber on the blackboard:
    "Children, could someone tell me what is this?"\
    Vovochka raises his hand: "It's a dick, Marivanna!" The teacher
    bursts into tears and runs out.\
    In a minute the principal rushes in: "All right, what did you do
    now? Which one of you brought Maria Ivanovna to tears? And who the
    hell drew that dick on the blackboard?"

-   The teacher asks the class to produce a word that starts with the
    letter "A"; Vovochka happily raises his hand and says "Asshole!"\
    The teacher, shocked, responds "For shame! There's no such word!"\
    "That's strange," says Vovochka thoughtfully, "the asshole exists,
    but the word doesn't!"

#### Vasily Ivanovich

Image:Vasily Chapaev.gif|right|156px **Vasily Ivanovich Chapayev**
(Russian: Василий Иванович Чапаев), a Red Army hero of the Russian Civil
War, in the rank of Division Commander, was featured in a hugely popular
1934 biopic. The most common topics are about the war with the
monarchist White Army, Chapayev's futile attempts to enroll into the
Frunze Military Academy, and the circumstances of Chapayev's death;
officially, he was gunned down by the Whites while attempting to flee
across the Ural River after a lost battle.

Chapayev is usually accompanied by his aide-de-camp **Petka** (Peter —
Петька), as well as **Anka the Machine-Gunner** (Anna —
Анка-Пулемётчица), and political commissar **Furmanov**, all based on
real people.

Being well known in Russian popular culture, Chapayev, Petka and Anka
were featured in a series of Russian adventure games released in the
late 1990s and early 2000s.

-   "I flunked my history exam, Petka. They asked me who Caesar was, and
    I said it's a stallion from our 7th cavalry squadron."\
    "It's all my fault, Vasily Ivanovich! While you were away, I
    reassigned him to the 6th!"

-   Chapayev, Petka and Anka, in hiding from the Whites, are crawling
    *plastoon*-style across a field: Anka first, then Petka and Chapayev
    is last.\
    Petka says to Anka, "Anka, you lied about your proletarian descent!
    Your mother must have been a ballerina -- your legs are so fine!"\
    Chapayev responds, "And your father, Petka, must have been a
    plowman, judging from the deep furrow you're leaving behind you!"

-   On the occasion of an anniversary of the October Revolution,
    Furmanov gives a political lecture to the rank and file: "...And now
    we are on our glorious way to the shining horizons of Communism!"\
    "How did it go?", Chapayev asks Petka afterwards. "Exciting!... But
    unclear. What the hell is a horizon?"\
    "See Petka, it is a line you may see far away in the steppe when the
    weather is good. And it's a tricky one -- no matter how long you
    ride towards it, you'll never reach it. You'll only wear down your
    horse."\
    *(Many other folk characters have starred in this joke as well,
    including Rabinovich.)*

#### Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson

Image:Livanov.jpg|thumb|175px|Vasily Livanov as Sherlock Holmes A number
of jokes involve characters from the famous novels by Sir Arthur Conan
Doyle about the private detective Sherlock Holmes and his friend Doctor
Watson. The jokes appeared and became popular soon after the The
Adventures of Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson film series came out on
Soviet TV in late 1970s - mid-1980s. In all those movies the characters
were brilliantly played by the same actors - Vasily Livanov (as Sherlock
Holmes) and Vitaly Solomin (as Dr. Watson). Quotes from these films are
usually included in the jokes («Элементарно, Ватсон!» — "Elementary, my
dear Watson!"). The narrator of such a joke usually tries to mimic the
unique husky voice of Vasily Livanov. The standard plot of these jokes
is a short dialog where Watson naïvely wonders about something and
Holmes finds a "logical" explanation to the phenomenon in question.
Occasionally the jokes also include other characters - Mrs. Hudson, the
landlady of Holmes's residence on Baker Street, or Sir Henry and his
butler Barrymore from The Hound of the Baskervilles and detective's
nemesis Professor Moriarty.

-   Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson were going camping. They pitched their
    tent under the stars and went to sleep. Sometime in the middle of
    the night Holmes woke Watson up and said: "Watson, look up at the
    stars, and tell me what you see." Watson replied: "I see millions
    and millions of stars." Holmes said: "And what do you deduce from
    that?" Watson replied: "Well, if there are millions of stars, and if
    even a few of those have planets, it’s quite likely there are some
    planets like Earth out there. And if there are a few planets like
    Earth out there, there might also be life." And Holmes said:
    "Watson, you idiot, it means that somebody stole our tent."

This joke won the 2nd place on World's funniest joke contest.

#### Fantômas

Image:Fantomas early film poster.jpg|150px|right Some older jokes
involve Fantômas, a fictional criminal and master of disguise from a
French detective series *Fantômas (1913 serial)|Fantômas*, which were
once widely popular in the USSR. His archenemy is Inspector Juve,
charged with catching him. Fantômas' talent for disguise is usually the
focus of the joke, allowing for jokes featuring all sorts of other
characters:

-   (From the days of Golda Meir) Fantômas sneaks into Mao Zedong's
    private chamber as the latter is on his deathbed, and takes off his
    mask. "Well, Petka, fate sure does have a way of scattering friends
    all over the world, doesn't it?", says Mao. "Ah, if you only knew,
    Vasily Ivanovich," responds Fantômas, "what our Anka has been up to
    in Israel!"

### New Russians

**New Russians**, (Novyi Russkiy, Russian: новый русский) i.e. the
*nouveau-riche*, arrogant, stupid and poorly educated post-perestroika
businessmen and gangsters, were a very popular category of characters in
Russian jokes in the 1990s. A common plot is the interaction of a New
Russian in his archetypal black-colored Mercedes S600 with a regular
Russian in his modest Soviet-era Zaporozhets after having had a car
accident. The New Russian is often a violent criminal or at least speaks
criminal argot, with a number of neologisms (or common words with skewed
meaning) typical among New Russians. In a way, these anecdotes are a
continuation of the Soviet-era series about Georgians, who were then
depicted as extremely wealthy. The physical appearance of the New
Russians is often that of overweight men with short haircuts, thick gold
chains and crimson jackets, with their fingers in the horns gesture,
riding the "600 Merc" and showing off their wealth.

-   A New-Russian's son complains to his father: "Daddy, all my
    schoolmates are riding the bus, and I look like a black sheep in
    this 600 Merc." — "No worries, son. I'll buy you a bus, and you'll
    ride like everyone else!"
-   "Look at my new tie," says a New Russian to his colleague. "I bought
    it for 500 dollars in the store over there." — "You got yourself
    conned," says the other. "You could have paid *twice as much* for
    the same one just across the street!"
-   A new Russian and an old man lie injured side-by-side in an
    emergency room:

:   — How did you get here, old fella?
:   — I had an old Zaporozhets car, and I put my war-trophy
    Messerschmitt jet engine in it. While driving on a highway, I saw a
    Ferrari ahead and tried to overtake it. My speed was too high, I
    lost control and crashed into a tree. And how did you get here?
:   — I was driving my Ferrari when I saw a Zaporozhets overtaking me. I
    thought that my car might have broken down and was actually standing
    still. So I opened the door and walked out...

:   *Compare with* German Manta jokes.

### Animals

Jokes set in the animal kingdom also feature characters, which draw
their roots in the old Slavic fairy tales, where animals are portrayed
as sapient beings with a stereotypical behavior, such as the violent
Wolf, the sneaky (female) Fox, the cocky coward Hare, the strong,
simple-minded Bear, the multi-dimensional Hedgehog and the king of
animal kingdom, Lion. In the Russian language all objects, animate and
inanimate, have a (grammatical) gender - masculine, feminine, or neuter.
The reader should assume that the Wolf, the Bear, the Hare, the Lion and
the Hedgehog are males, whereas the Fox is a female.

Image:Pap.svg|right

-   The Bear, the Wolf, the Hare and the Vixen are playing cards. The
    Bear warns, shuffling: "No cheating! If anyone is cheating, her smug
    red-furred face is gonna hurt!"
-   "If something has spilled from somewhere, then that must mean that
    something has poured into somewhere else," the Drunken Hedgehog
    mused philosophically when the campers quarrelled over a broken
    bottle. ("Drunken hedgehog" is a kind of multipurpose Russian
    cliché.)

Animals in Russian jokes are and were very well aware of politics in the
realm of humans.

-   A bunch of animals including a cock are in prison and brag to each
    other about what they are there for. The cock doesn't take part in
    this. Someone asks: "And what are you in for?" — "I am not talking
    to you, criminals. I am a political prisoner!" — "How come?" — "I
    pecked a Young Pioneer in the arse!"

Often animal jokes are in fact fables, i.e., their punchline is (or
eventually becomes) a kind of a maxim.

-   The Hare runs like crazy through a forest and meets the Wolf. The
    Wolf asks: "What's the matter? Why such haste?" "The camels there
    are caught and shod! The Wolf says: "But you're not a camel!" —
    "Hey, after you are caught and shod, just you try to prove to them
    that you are not a camel!" This joke is a suggested to be an origin
    of the popular Russian saying "try to prove you are not a camel" in
    the sense "try to prove something to someone who doesn't want to
    listen", used in relation to violations of the presumption of
    innocence by Russian law enforcement agencies or when someone has to
    fight the bureaucracy to get official papers proving that one has
    lost a leg or is even alive. The Hare and the joke itself was used
    to illustrate the hassles of a Soviet *lishenets* in a 1929 issue of
    a satirical magazine *Chudak*. Mikhail Melnichenko, in an article
    about Soviet political jokes cites a 1926 private collection, which
    renders the joke in a more gruesome form, where the Hare is scared
    of the rumor that all camels are taken hostages by Cheka and shot (a
    reference to the Red Terror). A similar parable was told by a
    13th-century Persian poet and Sufi Jalal ad-Din Rumi, it which a
    person was scared to be taken for a donkey and skinned.

#### The Golden Fish

Image:Carassus carassus gold.JPG|right|128pxAside from mammals, a rather
common non-human is the "Golden Fish", who asks the catcher to release
her in exchange for three wishes. The first Russian instance of this
appeared in Alexander Pushkin's *The Tale of the Fisherman and the
Fish*. In jokes, the Fisherman may be replaced by a representative of a
nationality or ethnicity and the third wish usually makes the punch line
of the joke.

-   An American, a Frenchman and a Russian are alone on an uninhabited
    island. They catch fish for food and suddenly catch a Golden Fish,
    who promises to fulfill two wishes for each for her own freedom:\
    The American: "A million dollars and to go back home!"\
    The Frenchman: "Three beautiful women and to go back home!"\
    The Russian: "Tsk, and we were getting along so well. Three crates
    of vodka and the two fellas back!"
    -   Side Note: This joke is a play on the fact that in Russia it is
        believed that three is the optimal number of people for
        drinking. This in turn goes back to when in the Soviet Union a
        bottle of vodka cost 2.87 Soviet rubles, 3 rubles being a
        convenient price for three men to buy a bottle and have 13
        kopecks left for a snack. The classic for the latter was a
        rectangular pack of soft processed cheese "Druzhba"
        (Friendship), with that exact price. Therefore, a natural
        company is 3, each contributing 1 ruble. This procedure was
        dubbed "to have arranged for three (persons)" (; *soobrazit' na
        troikh*, literal translation: "to have figured out for three").
        Much of Soviet folklore is based on this interpretation of the
        "magic of the number 3".

A similar type of joke involves a wish-granting Genie, the main
difference being that in the case of the Golden Fish the Fisherman
suffers from his own stupidity or greed, while Genie is known for
ingeniously twisting an interpretation of the wish to fool the grantee.

-   A guy finds an old bottle, picks it up and opens it. Genie comes out
    of the bottle and says: "Thanks so much for letting me out! I feel I
    should do something for you, too. Would you like to become a Hero of
    the Soviet Union?" (Hero of the Soviet Union was the highest Soviet
    award). The guy says: "Yes, sure!" Next thing he knows, he finds
    himself on a battlefield with five grenades, alone against five
    panzers.
-   A starving thirsty guy crawls in a desert and finds a bottle with
    genie, who says: "I can make your dream come true! What do you
    want?" - "I wanna get home!" - "So, let's go" - "No, I wanna get
    home quickly!" - "So, let's run!"

### Drunkards

-   A drunkard takes a leak by a lamp pole in the street. A policeman
    tries to reason with him: "Can't you see the latrine is just 25 feet
    away?" The drunkard replies: "Do you think I got me a damn fire hose
    in my pants here?"

-   Drunk \#1 is slowly walking, bracing himself against a fence and
    stumbling. He comes across Drunk \#2, who is lying next to the
    fence. "What a disgrace! Lying around like a pig! I'm ashamed for
    you." "You just keep on walking, demagogue! We'll see what you're
    gonna do when you run out of fence!"

-   A drunkard is searching for something under a streetlamp. A passerby
    asks: "What are you searching for?" The drunkard responds: "My
    housekeys." They start searching together. Ten minutes later the
    passerby asks: "Are you sure you lost them here?" The drunkard says:
    "I lost them over there, but there's more light here."

### Policemen

These often revolve around the supposition that the vast majority of
Russian and Soviet *militsioners* (now called 'politzia') (policemen)
accept bribes. Also, they are not considered to be very bright.

-   Three prizes were awarded for the successes in Socialist competition
    of traffic inspection dept. \#18. The third prize is the *Complete
    Works* of Vladimir Lenin. The second prize is 100 roubles and a
    ticket to Sochi... The first prize is a portable stop sign. (There
    are several versions with this punch line about the stop sign. This
    one depicts a Soviet peculiarity. A portable stop sign allows the
    militsioner to put it in an unexpected or hard to see place on a
    road, fine everyone passing it and appropriate most of the fines for
    himself.)

-   A person on a bus tells a joke: "Do you know why policemen always go
    in pairs?" / "No, why?" / "It's specialization: one knows how to
    read, the other — how to write." / A hand promptly grabs him by the
    shoulder — a policeman is standing right behind him! "Your papers!"
    he barks. The hapless person surrenders his papers. The policeman
    opens them, reads, and nods to his partner: "Write him up a citation
    for slandering the Soviet Militsiya, Vasya." (A version of this joke
    involves the third policeman whose sole job is to watch over these
    two dangerous intellectuals.)

### Ethnic stereotypes

Imperial Russia had been multiethnic for many centuries and this fact
continued through the Soviet period, and continues still. Throughout
their history several ethnic stereotypes have developed, often shared
with those produced by other ethnicities (usually with the
understandable exception of the ethnicity in question, but not always).

#### Chukchi

Image:Choris, Tschuktschen.jpg|200px|right **Chukchi**, the native
people of Chukotka, the most remote northeast corner of Russia, are the
most common minority targeted for generic ethnic jokes in Russia — many
other nations have a particular one they make fun of (cf. Irish jokes in
Britain, Newfie jokes in Canada or Belgian jokes in France and the
Netherlands). In jokes, they are depicted as generally primitive,
uncivilized and simple-minded, but clever in a naive kind of way. A
propensity for constantly saying *"odnako"* — equivalent to "however"
depending on context — is a staple of Chukcha jokes. Often a partner of
Chukcha in the jokes is a Russian geologist.

-   "Chukcha, why did you buy a fridge if it's so cold in tundra?" /
    "Why, is minus fifty Celsius outside yaranga, is minus ten inside,
    is minus five in the fridge — a warm place, however!"
-   A Chukcha comes into a shop and asks: "Do you have color TVs?" "Yes,
    we do." "Give me a green one."
-   A Chukcha applies for membership in the Union of Soviet Writers. He
    is asked what literature he is familiar with. "Have you read
    Pushkin?" "No." "Have you read Dostoevsky?" "No." "Can you read at
    all?" The Chukcha, offended, replies, "Chukcha not reader, Chukcha
    writer!" (The latter phrase has become a popular cliché in Russian
    culture hinting at happy or militant ignorance.)

Chukchi do not miss their chance to retaliate.

-   A Chukcha and a Russian geologist go hunting polar bears. They track
    one down at last. Seeing the bear, the Chukcha shouts "Run!" and
    starts running away. The Russian shrugs, raises his gun and shoots
    the bear. "Russian hunter bad hunter!" the Chukcha exclaims. "Ten
    miles to the yaranga you haul this bear yourself!"

Chukchi in jokes, due to their innocence, often see the inner truth of
situations.

-   A Chukcha returns home from Moscow to great excitement and interest.
    "What is socialism like?" asks someone. "Oh," begins the Chukcha in
    awe, "There, everything is for the betterment of man. I even saw
    that man himself!", hinting at the widespread slogan "Everything for
    the betterment of man."

#### Ukrainians

Image:Stamp Soviet Union 1961 3k
Ukrainians.jpg|right|150px**Ukrainians** are depicted as rustic, stingy,
and fond of salted *salo* (pork back fat), and their accent, which is
imitated in jokes, is perceived as funny.

-   A Ukrainian tourist is questioned at international customs:

:   — Are you carrying any weapons or drugs?
:   — What are drugs?
:   — They make you get high.
:   — Yes, salo.
:   — But salo is not a drug.
:   — When I eat salo, I get high!

-   A Ukrainian is asked: "Can you eat an entire pound of apples?" —
    "Yes, I can." — "Can you eat two pounds of apples?" — "I can." —
    "And five pounds?" — "I can." — "Can you eat 100 pounds?!" — "What I
    cannot eat, I will nibble!"

Ukrainians are perceived to bear a grudge against Russians (derided as
*Moskali* by Ukrainians)

-   The Soviet Union has launched the first man into space. A Hutsul
    shepherd, standing on top of a hill, shouts over to another shepherd
    on another hill to tell the news. "Mykola!" / "Yes!" / "The moskali
    have flown to space!" / "All of them?" / "No, just one." / "So why
    are you bothering me then?" (An oral version may end at the "all of
    them" sentence, said in a hopeful tone).

#### Georgians

**Georgians** are almost always depicted as stupid, greedy, hot-blooded
or sexually addicted, and in some cases, all four at the same time. A
very loud and theatrical Georgian accent, including the grammatical
errors typical of Georgians, and occasional Georgian words are
considered funny to imitate in Russian and often becomes a joke in
itself.

In some jokes, they are portrayed as rich, because in Soviet times,
Georgians were also perceived as running black market businesses. There
is a funny expression, that usually in police reports they are termed as
"persons of Caucasian nationality" . Since the Russian word for
"person" in the formal sense,, is the same as the word for "face",
this allows a play on words about "faces of Caucasian nationality". In
Russia itself, most people see "persons of Caucasian nationality" mostly
at marketplaces selling fruits and flowers. Many jokes about Georgians
are being recently retold in terms of "New Russians".

-   A plane takes off from the Tbilisi airport in Georgia. A passenger
    storms the pilot's cabin, waving an AK-47 rifle and demanding that
    the flight be diverted to Israel. The pilot shrugs OK, but suddenly
    the hijacker's head falls off his shoulders, and a Georgian pops
    from behind with a blood-drenched dagger, and a huge suitcase:
    "Lisssn here *genatsvale*: no any Israel-Misrael; fly Moscow nonstop
    – my roses are fading!"

-   In the zoo, two girls are discussing a gorilla with a huge penis:
    "THAT's what a real man must have!" A Georgian passer-by
    sarcastically remarks: "You are badly mistaken, its not a man, it is
    a male. THIS is what a real man must have!", and produces a thick
    wallet.

#### Armenians

**Armenians** are often used interchangeably with Georgians, sharing
some of the stereotypes. However their unique context is the fictitious
*Radio Yerevan*, usually telling political jokes. Many jokes are based
on word play, often combined with the usage of Southern accent and
consequent misunderstanding between the characters.

-   An old Armenian is on his deathbed: "My children, treasure the
    Jews." "Why Jews?" "Because once they are dealt with, we will be
    next."

#### Estonians and Finns

**Estonians and Finns** are depicted as having no sense of humour and
being stubborn, taciturn and especially slow. The Estonian accent,
especially its sing-song tune and the lack of genders in grammar, forms
part of the humour. Their common usage of long vowels and consonants
both in speech and orthography (e.g. words such as Tallinn, Saaremaa)
also led to the stereotype of being slow in speech, thinking and action.
In the everyday life a person may be derisively named a "hot Estonian
fellow" (or, in similar spirit, a "hot-tempered Finnish bloke", a phrase
popularized by the 1995 Russian comedy *Peculiarities of the National
Hunt*) to emphasize tardiness or lack of temperament. Indeed, Estonians
play a similar role in Soviet humor to that of Finns in Scandinavian
jokes.

Finnish political scientist Ilmari Susiluoto, also an author of three
books on Russian humor, writes that Finns and Russians understand each
other's humor. "Being included in a Russian anecdote is a privilege that
Danes or Dutchmen have not attained. These nations are too boring and
unvaried to rise into the consciousness of a large country. But the
funny and slightly silly, stubborn Finns, the *Chukhnas* do."

-   An Estonian stands by a railway track. Another Estonian passes by on
    a handcar, pushing the pump up and down. The first one asks: "Iis
    iitt a llonngg wwayy ttoo Ttallinn?" — "Nnoot ttoo llonngg." He gets
    on the car and joins pushing the pump up and down. After two hours
    of silent pumping the first Estonian asks again: "Iis iitt a llonngg
    wwayy ttoo Ttallinn?" — "Nnooow iiitt iiiis llonngg wwayy."
-   A special offer from Estonian mobile phone providers: the first two
    hours of a call are free.
-   "I told some Estonian blokes that they're slow." / "What did they
    reply?" / "Nothing, but they beat me up the following day. "
-   A Finnish family - parents and two brothers - goes to the
    countryside in their car. Suddenly some animal crosses the road in
    front of the car and runs away into the forest. After an hour one
    brother says: "It is a fox!". After another hour the second brother
    says: "No, it is a wolf!". After two hours the father replies:
    "Well, why don't you have a fight, you hot Finnish guys!".

Finns share with Chukchi their ability to withstand cold:

-   At -10 degrees Celsius, heating is switched on in British homes,
    while Finns change into a long-sleeved shirt. At -20, Austrians fly
    to Málaga, while Finns celebrate midsummer. At -200, hell freezes
    over and Finland wins the Eurovision Song Contest. At -273 absolute
    zero temperature is reached, all atom movement ceases. The Finns
    shrug and say: "Perkele, a bit chilly today, isn't it?". (This joke
    predates the event, deemed impossible, of Finland actually winning
    the contest, in 2006.)

#### Jews

Jewish humour is a highly developed subset of Russian humor, largely
based on the Jews' self-image. These Jewish anecdotes are not the same
as anti-Semitic jokes. As some Jews say themselves, Jewish jokes are
being made by either anti-Semites or the Jews themselves. Instead,
whether told by Jews or non-Jewish Russians, these jokes show cynicism,
self-irony and wit that is characteristic of Jewish humour both in
Russia and elsewhere in the world (see Jewish humor). The jokes are
usually told with a characteristic Jewish accent (stretching out
syllables, parodying the uvular trill of "R", etc.) and some
peculiarities of sentence structure calqued into Russian from Yiddish.
Many of these jokes are set in Odessa, and to some extent the phrase
"Odessa humor" is synonymous with "Jewish jokes," even if the characters
don't have Jewish names and even their religion/ethnicity is never
mentioned. To Russians, it's sufficient to begin a joke with "So, an
Odessan woman gets on the bus...", and her Jewishness is understood by
the listener.

-   Abram cannot sleep, tossing and turning from side to side... Finally
    his wife Sarah protests: "Abram, what's bothering you?" / "I owe
    Moishe 20 roubles, but I have no money. What shall I do?" / Sarah
    bangs on the wall and shouts to the neighbors: "Moishe! My Abram
    still owes you 20 roubles? Well he isn't giving them back!" Turning
    to her husband she says: "Now go to sleep and let Moishe stay
    awake!"
-   An Odessa Jew meets another one. "Have you heard, Einstein has won
    the Nobel Prize?" / "Oh, what for?" / "He developed this Relativity
    theory." / "Yeah, what's that?" / "Well, you know, five hairs on
    your head is relatively few. Five hairs in your soup is relatively
    many." / "And for that he gets the Nobel Prize?!"
-   A Red Guardsman knocks at Abram's door. He answers through the door,
    "yes?" "Abram, we've come for everything precious." Abram thinks for
    a few seconds, and calls "Rosa, my precious, someone's here for
    you!"

#### Chinese

Image:Everyday Life in Old China 13.jpg|right|180px

Common jokes center on the size of the Chinese population, the Chinese
language, and the perceptions of the Chinese as cunning, industrious,
and hard-working. Other popular jokes revolve around the belief that the
Chinese are capable of amazing feats by primitive means, such as the
Great Leap Forward.

-   "During the Damansky Island incident the Chinese military developed
    three main strategies: The Great Offensive, The Small Retreat, and
    Infiltration by Small Groups of One to Two Million Across the
    Border."
-   "Chinese hackers cracked Pentagon's server. Each of them tried to
    login with the password "Mao Tse-Tung". On the 2,934,568th attempt
    the server agreed."
-   "When a child is born in a Chinese family, there is an ancient
    tradition: a silver spoon is dropped on the jade floor. The sound
    the spoon makes will be the name of the newborn." (see Chinese
    names)
-   The first report of the first Chinese human spaceflight: "All
    systems operational, boiler-men on duty!"

A good deal of the jokes are puns based on the fact that a widespread
Chinese syllable (spelled "hui" in pinyin) looks very similar to the
obscene Russian word for penis. For this reason since about 1956 the
Russian-Chinese dictionaries render the Russian transcription of this
syllable as "хуэй" (*huey*) (which actually is closer to the correct
Chinese pronunciation). The most embarrassing case probably is the word
"socialism" (社会主义; pinyin: *shè huì zhǔ yì*), rendered previously as
шэ-хуй-чжу-и.

-   A new Chinese ambassador is to meet Gromyko. When the latter enters,
    the Chinese presents himself: "Zhui Hui!" Gromyko, unperturbed,
    retorts "Zhui sam!" The surprised Chinese asks: "And where is
    Gromyko?" (The pun is that "zhui hui!" (a mock Chinese name) means
    "chew a dick!" in Russian and "zhui sam" means "chew [it]
    yourself").
-   Сунь Хуй в Чай Вынь Пей Сам, *Sun' Huy v Chay Vyn' Pey Sam*,
    (literally meaning "Dip [your] penis into tea, withdraw [and] drink
    [it], yourself") is a made-up "Chinese name" that is analogous of
    the English *Who Flung Dung*. Most suitable English imitation sounds
    like "Dip Dick Tea, Back, You Drink". There is another variation of
    this joke about two Chinese persons: Сунь Хуй в Чай ("Sun' Huy v
    Chay") and Вынь Су Хим ("Vyn' Su Him"), which can be translated as
    "Dip [your] penis into tea" and "Take [it] out dry", where a word
    "сухим" ("suhim" - meaning "dry") is divided into two syllables "су"
    ("su") and "хим" ("him")

#### Russians

Russians are a stereotype in Russian jokes themselves when set next to
other stereotyped ethnicities. Thus, the Russian appearing in a triple
joke with two Westerners, German, French, American or Englishman, will
provide for a self-ironic punchline depicting him as simple-minded and
negligently careless but physically robust, which often ensures he
retains the upper hand over his less naive Western counterparts. Another
common plot is a Russian holding a contest with technologically superior
opponents (usually, an American and a Japanese) and winning with sheer
brute force or a clever trick.

-   A Frenchman, a German, and a Russian go on a safari and are captured
    by cannibals. They are brought to the chief, who says, "We are going
    to eat you right now. But I am a civilized man, I studied human
    rights at the Patrice Lumumba University in Moscow, so I'll grant
    each of you a last request." The German asks for a mug of beer and a
    bratwurst. He gets it and the cannibals eat him. The Frenchman asks
    for three girls. He has crazy sex with them, and then follows the
    German. The Russian asks: "Hit me hard, right on my nose." The chief
    is surprised, but hits him. The Russian pulls out a Kalashnikov and
    shoots all the cannibals. The mortally wounded chief asks him: "Why
    didn't you do this before we ate the German?", the Russian proudly
    replies: "Russians are not aggressors!" (*This joke has also been
    used as a Jewish joke; more specifically, as an Israeli joke,
    alluding to Israel's being constantly afraid of being seen as the
    'aggressor'.*)

Image:Typhoon iced.jpg|150px|right

-   A Chukcha sits on the shore of the Bering Strait. An American
    submarine surfaces. The American captain opens the hatch and asks:
    "Which way is Alaska?" The Chukcha points his finger: "That way!"
    "Thanks!" says the American, shouts "South-South-East, bearing 159.5
    degrees!" down the hatch and the submarine submerges. Ten minutes
    later a Soviet submarine emerges. The Russian captain opens the
    hatch and asks the Chukcha: "Where did the American submarine go?"
    The Chukcha replies: "South-South-East bearing 159.5 degrees!"
    "Don't be a smart-ass," says the captain, "just point your finger!"

-   A Frenchman, a Japanese and a Russian were trapped by a Klingon. He
    locked them in a cell and asked to surprise him using three steel
    balls – the winner will be released, the others will be executed. In
    a week the Frenchman demonstrates a juggle with the balls. The
    Japanese has created a rock garden. However the Russian was declared
    winner: he broke one ball and lost another one.

Puns
----

Like everywhere else, a good deal of jokes in Russia are based on puns.

-   **(L)** The genitive plural of a noun (used with a numeral to
    indicate five or more of something, as opposed to the dual, used for
    two, three, or four, see Russian nouns) is a rather unpredictable
    form of the Russian noun, and there are a handful of words which
    even native speakers have trouble producing this form of (either due
    to rarity or an actual lexical gap). A common example of this is
    *kocherga* (fireplace poker). The joke is set in a Soviet factory.
    Five pokers are to be requisitioned. The correct forms are acquired,
    but as they are being filled out, a debate arises: what is the
    genitive plural of *kocherga*? Is it *Kocherg?* *Kocherieg?*
    *Kochergov?*... One thing is clear: a form with the wrong genitive
    plural of *kocherga* will bring disaster from the typically pedantic
    bureaucrats. Finally, an old janitor overhears the commotion, and
    tells them to send in two separate requisitions: one for two
    *kochergi* and another for three *kochergi*. In some versions, they
    send in a request for 4 *kochergi* and one extra to find out the
    correct word, only to receive back "here are your 4 *kochergi* and
    one extra." (In reality, a bureaucrat would likely resort to a trick
    like "Kocherga: 5 items"; a similar story by Mikhail Zoshchenko
    involves yet another answer.)

### Eggs

Image:Madonna Lily Egg.jpg|80px|right A Russian slang for 'testicle' is
'egg' (*yaitso*). A large variety of jokes capitalizes on this, ranging
from predictably silly to surprisingly elegant.

-   A guy jumped onto a bus. There he fell onto other man, who was
    holding a large sack. "Watch the eggs!" - cried that man. "Are you
    stupid? Who would carry eggs in a sack?" - "Watch YOUR eggs. The
    sack's full of nails."
-   St. Petersburg. Hermitage Museum. An exhibit of a masterpiece by
    Peter Carl Fabergé. The caption reads: "Fabergé. *Self-portrait*.
    (Fragment)"
-   A train compartment. A family: a small daughter, her mother and
    grandma. The fourth passenger is a Georgian. The mother starts
    feeding a soft-boiled egg to the daughter with a silver spoon.
    Grandma: "Don't you know that eggs can spoil silver?" — "Who would
    have known!", thinks the Georgian and replaces his silver cigarette
    case from the front pants pocket to the back one.

Religion
--------

Image:Russia-Moscow-Cathedral of Christ the Saviour-8.jpg|right|150px

Some religious jokes make fun of the clergy. They tend to be told in
quasi-Church Slavonic, with its archaisms and the stereotypical okanye -
a clear pronunciation of the unstressed /o/ as /o/. (Modern Russian or
"Muscovite" speech Vowel reduction in Russian|reduces unstressed /o/ to
/a/.) Clergymen in these jokes always bear obsolete names of
distinctively Greek origin and speak in basso profundo.

-   **(L)** At the lesson of the Holy Word: "Disciple Dormidontiy, pray
    tell me, is the soul separable from the body or not." / "Separable,
    Father." / "Verily speakest thou. Substantiate thy reckoning." /
    "Yesterday morning, Father, I was passing by your cell and overheard
    your voice chanting: (imitates bass) '...And now, my soul, arise and
    get thee dressed.' " / "Substantiatest... But in vulgar !" (The
    Russian phrase that translates literally as "my soul" is a term of
    endearment, often toward romantic partners, comparable to English
    "my darling")
-   A lass in a miniskirt jumps onto a bus. The bus starts abruptly, and
    she falls onto the lap of a seated priest. Surprised, she looks down
    and says, "Wow!" "It's not a 'wow!', my daughter," says the priest,
    "it is the key to the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour!"

Other jokes touching on religion involve Heaven or Hell.

### Afterlife

-   A Communist died and since he was an honest man albeit atheist, he
    was sentenced to rotate spending one year in Hell and one year in
    Heaven. One year passed and Satan said to God : "Take this man as
    fast as possible, because he turned all my young demons into Young
    Pioneers, I have to restore some order." Another year passed, Satan
    meets God again and tells him : "Lord God, it's my turn now." God
    replied : "First of all, don't call me Lord God, but instead Comrade
    God; second, there is no God; and one more thing - don't distract me
    or I'll be late to the Party meeting."

-   A Russian and an American are sentenced to Hell. The Devil summons
    them and says: "Guys, you have 2 options: an American or Russian
    hell. In the American one you can do what you want, but you'll have
    to eat a bucket of shit every morning. The Russian one is the same,
    but it's 2 buckets." The Yankee quickly makes up his mind and goes
    to American Hell, while the Russian eventually chooses the Russian
    one. In a week or so they meet. The Russian asks: "So, what's it
    like out there?"/ "Exactly what the devil said, the Hell itself is
    OK, but eating a bucket of shit is killing me. And you?" / "Ah, it
    feels just like home - either the shit doesn't get delivered or
    there aren't enough buckets for everyone!"

-   An American, a Hindu and a Russian land in Purgatory. A grey-winged
    angel with a huge whip hanging from his belt meets them and says:
    "Alright, here's the rules. Anyone who takes three strikes from my
    whip without screaming, can go straight to Heaven. You can shield
    yourselves with whatever you like. We've got everything here. Who's
    first?" The American steps forward. "Alright, you've got three hours
    to prepare yourself." The American puts on a full-body Kevlar
    outfit, gets into a tank, drives it into a concrete bunker, the
    bunker is covered with 15 feet of dirt and inch-thick titanium
    sheets. The angel unravels his whip. SNAP! The titanium and the dirt
    are gone. SNAP! The bunker and tank are gone. SNAP! The American
    howls in pain, the ground opens up under his feet and he drops
    straight to Hell. "Next", says the angel. The Hindu steps forward.
    "You've got three hours to prepare yourself." / "I need only five
    minutes. I have studied Yoga all my life and can make myself immune
    to all pain." The Hindu gets into a lotus position, hums mantras for
    a few minutes and rises a couple of inches off the ground. The angel
    unravels his whip. SNAP! SNAP! SNAP! The Hindu is completely
    unfazed. "Hmm, impressive. Alright, you're free to go." / "Thank
    you, but only after I see how this one makes it out of this.", says
    the Hindu, looking at the Russian. / "Your call." The angel turns to
    the Russian: "What are you going to shield yourself with?" / "With
    the Hindu, of course."

Russian military jokes
----------------------

Probably any nation big enough to have an army has a good deal of its
own barracks jokes. Other than for plays on words, these jokes are
usually international. In the Soviet Union, however, military service
was universal (for males), so most people could relate to them. In these
jokes a *praporschik* (warrant officer) is an archetypal bully of
limited wit.

A. Dmitriev illustrates his sociological essay "Army Humor" with a large
number of military jokes, mostly of Russian origin.

There is an enormous number of one-liners, supposedly quoting a
praporschik:

-   *Private Ivanov, dig a trench from me to the next scarecrow!"*
-   *Private Ivanov, dig a trench from the fence to lunchtime!"*
-   *Don't make clever faces at me — you're future officers, now act
    accordingly!"*

The punchline "from the fence to lunchtime" has become a well-known
Russian cliché for an assignment with no defined ending (or for doing
something forever).

Some of them are philosophical and apply not just to warrant officers.

-   *Scene One*: A tree. An apple. An ape comes and starts to shake the
    tree. A voice from above: "Think, **think**!" The ape thinks, grabs
    a stick, and hits the apple off. / *Scene Two*: A tree. An apple. A
    *praporschik* comes and starts to shake the tree. A voice from
    above: "Think, **think**!" / "There is nothing to think about, gotta
    shake!".

Commander and intellectual trooper:

-   A commander announces: - "The platoon has been assigned to unload
    'luminum, the lightest iron in the world". A trooper responds,
    "Permission to speak... It's 'aluminium', not 'luminum', and it's
    one of the lightest metals in the world, not the lightest 'iron' in
    the world.". The commander retorts: "The platoon is going to unload
    'luminum... and the intelligentsia are going to unload 'castum
    ironum'!" (The Russian words are *lyuminiy* and *chuguniy*).

(A persistent theme in Russian military/police/law-enforcement-related
jokes is the ongoing conflict between the representatives of the armed
forces/law enforcement, and the "intelligentsia", i.e. well-educated
members of society. Therefore, this theme is a satire of the image of
military/law-enforcement officers and superiors as dumb and distrustful
of "those educated smart-alecks".)

Until shortly before perestroika, **all** fit male students of higher
education had obligatory military ROTC courses from which they graduate
as junior officers in the military reserve. A good deal of military
jokes originated there. Image:Comparative nuclear fireball
sizes.svg|left|100px

-   "Soviet nuclear bombs are 25% more efficient than the Atomic Bombs
    of the probable adversary. American bombs have 4 zones of effect: A,
    B, C, D, while ours have five: А, Б, В, Г, Д!" (the first five
    letters of the Russian alphabet, they are transliterated into Latin
    as A, B, V, G, D).
-   "A nuclear bomb always hits ground zero."
-   "Suppose we have a unit of M tanks... no, M is not enough. Suppose
    we have a unit of N tanks!"
-   A threat to an idle student: "I ought to take you out into the open
    field, put you face first against a wall, and shoot you between the
    eyes with a shotgun, so that you'd remember it for the rest of your
    life!
-   "Cadets, write down: the temperature of boiling water is 90°." One
    of the privates replies, "Comrade *praporshchik*, you're mistaken —
    it's 100°!" The officer checks in the book, and then replies,
    "Right, 100°. It is the right angle that boils at 90°."
-   - Cadets, now write down: "This device works at the temperature
    between -400 and 400 degrees."

:   - Comrade *praporshchik*, there is no temperature like -400
    degrees!.
:   - What would you know, it's a brand new, secret device.

Sometimes, these silly statements can cross over, intentionally or
unintentionally, into the realm of actual wit:

-   "Cadet, explain why you have come to class wearing the uniform of
    our probable military opponent!" *(most probably, the instructor
    means jeans made in the USA)* The right answer, as mentioned
    sometimes, is: "Because they are a probable war trophy!"

Image:Russia-Moscow-VDNH-Rocket R-7-1.jpg|128px|right It also can be
jokes about Russian nuclear-missile forces and worldwide disasters
because of lack of basic army discipline.

-   A missile silo officer falls asleep during his watch, with his face
    on the control board and hits the "red button"/ A mad colonel bursts
    in, the officer snaps up and proudly reports: "Nothing to report
    during my watch, comrade Colonel"/ "Nothing to report, you say?
    Nothing to report?! *Now where the hell is Belgium?!!*"
-   Somewhere in the Atlantic Ocean, two submarines, Soviet and
    American, come to the surface. The Soviet one is old and rusty; the
    American one is new and shiny. On the Soviet one, the crew lounges
    about without any order, and a drunken captain yells at them: "Who
    threw a *valenok* (traditional Russian winter footwear made of felt)
    on the control board? I'm asking you, who threw a *valenok* on the
    control board?!". From the American submarine, a shaved, sober and
    well-dressed captain, notes sarcastically: "You know, folks, in
    America...". The Russian captain dismissively brushes him off:
    "America??! There is none of your fucking America anymore!" (Turns
    back to the crew) "Who threw a *valenok* onto the control board?!"

There is also an eternal dispute between servicemen and civilians:

-   *Civilian*: "You servicemen are dumb. We civilians are smart!" /
    *Serviceman*: "If you are so smart, then why don’t you march in
    single file?"

Black humour
------------

### Chernobyl humour

-   An old woman stands in the market with a "Chernobyl mushrooms for
    sale" sign. A man goes up to her and asks, "Hey, what are you doing?
    Who's going to buy Chernobyl mushrooms?" And she tells him, "Why,
    lots of people. Some for their boss, others for their
    mother-in-law..."

-   A grandson asks his grandfather: "Grandpa, is it true that in 1986
    there was an accident at Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant?" "Yes, there
    was." — answered the Grandpa and patted the grandson's head.
    "Grandpa, is it true that it had absolutely no consequences?" "Yes,
    absolutely" — answered the Grandpa and patted the grandson's second
    head. (Often added "And they strolled off together, wagging their
    tails").

-   A Soviet newspaper reports: "Last night the Chernobyl Nuclear
    Powerstation fulfilled the Five Year Plan of heat energy generation
    in 4 microseconds."

-   "Is it true, that you may eat meat from Chernobyl?" - "Yes, you may.
    But your feces would need to be buried in concrete 5 ft deep in the
    earth."

### Medical humour

Medical jokes are widespread. Usually, they consist of a short dialogue
of doctor or nurse and patient.

-   "Nurse, where're we going?" / "To the morgue."/ "But I haven't died
    yet!"/ "Well, we haven't arrived yet."
-   "Nurse, where're we going?" / "To the morgue."/ "But I haven't died
    yet!"/ "The doc said 'to the morgue' — to the morgue it is!" / "But
    what is wrong with me?!" / "The autopsy will show!"

The phrase "The doc said 'to the morgue', to the morgue it is!" (*Доктор
сказал «в морг» — значит в морг!*) became a well-known Russian cliché
meaning that something unpleasant *must* be done.

-   "Doctor, can I have sex..." - "Which fucking sex??!!" - "Not just
    now! In future..." - "In which fucking future??!!"

Doctor dismisses patient after curing

-   "Well, now you must keep a strike confinement. First is a spare
    diet: grilled, smoked, salted, fat-laded, spiced dish is prohibited.
    A little mush and water. Then, no any alcohol. Even drop of drink
    can encourage severe problems. I say nothing about сigarettes - you
    must forget it!" / "But can I have sex, doctor?" / "Why not? It is
    permitted. But only with your wife - sexual arousal is death for
    you..."

University students
-------------------

The life of most Russian university students is often associated with
many people coming from small towns and living in dormitories. State
universities (the only type of universities in existence in Soviet
times) are notable for carelessness about the students' comfort and the
quality of food. Most jokes make fun of these "interesting" conditions,
inventive evasion by students of their academic duties or lecture
attendance, constant shortage of money and sometimes about alcoholic
tendencies of engineering students.

### Students' nutrition

-   A memo in a student dining hall: "Students, do not drop your food on
    the floor, two cats have already been poisoned!".
-   A crocodile's stomach can digest concrete. A student's stomach can
    digest that of a crocodile.
-   A student in the canteen: "Can I have 2 wieners...
    <whispers around: "Look at the rich guy!">.... and 17 forks,
    please?"
-   Two flies meet - one is fat, and the other is skinny. Skinny fly:
    How come your're so fat? Where do you get your food?\\Fat fly: The
    cafeteria, of course! I fly straight into a bowl of borsch, they
    pull me out, I fly away and lick the remains off myself. One week
    later, they meet again. The skinny fly is skinnier still. Fat fly:
    Didn't you listen to my advice?\\Skinny fly: I did. I flew into the
    bowl of borsch, but they pulled me out, sucked the remains off me
    and threw me away!\\Fat fly: Which cafeteria did you go to?\\Skinny
    fly: The Young Pioneer camp cafeteria.

### Students' drinking

-   A very rumpled student peeks into an exam room and slurs at the
    examiner: "Pp-proffessosssor, wou'd you al-low a drunk student tt-o
    tt-ake the exam?.." The professor sighs and says, "Sure, why not."
    The rumpled student turns around and slurs into the hallway:
    "G-guys, c-carry 'im in."

### Study

Also, there are a number of funny student obsessions such as *zachetka*
(a transcript of grades, carried by every student), *halyava* (a chance
of getting good or acceptable grades without any effort) and getting a
scholarship for good grades.

A large number of jokes are about an exam; these are usually a dialogue
between the professor and the student, based on a set of questions
written on a *bilet* (a small sheet of paper, literally: ticket), which
the student draws at random in the exam room and is given some time to
prepare answers for. Even more jokes use the fact that many (or even
most) students really study only when the exam is in the near future (in
one or two days), saving time for more interesting activities such as
parties, videogames and so on.

Cowboy jokes
------------

Image:ARTrussellCfullsize.jpg|250px|right Cowboy jokes is a popular
series about a Wild West full of trigger-happy simple-minded cowboys,
and of course the perception is that everything is big in Texas. It is
often difficult to guess whether these are imported or genuinely Russian
inventions.

:   In a saloon.
:   — The guy over there really pisses me off!
:   — There are four of them; which one?
:   (The joke narrator imitates the sounds of three shots)
:   — The one still standing!
    :   Variant - The guy over there have saved my life yesterday, I am
        really grateful to him \<...\> - The one that has fallen!

-   A joke related to English-to-Russian Western film dubbing, which in
    the 1990s was often unprofessional, and its tendency to self-censor
    obscenities from the original dialogue:

:   Two cowboys are standing at crossroads in a prairie.
    :   — Fuck, Bob! (Voice-over: *Where does this road lead to, Bob?*)
    :   — Shit, John! (Voice-over: *It leads to Texas, John*)
    :   — Fuck, Bob! (Voice-over: *Hell, we don't need to go to Texas,
        Bob!*)
    :   — Shit, John! (Voice-over: *Don't swear, John*)

-   Two cowboys, a newcomer and an old-timer, are drinking beer in front
    of a saloon. Suddenly, there is a clatter of hooves, a great cloud
    of dust, and something moving extremely fast from one end of town to
    the other. The newcomer looks at the old-timer, but seeing no
    reaction, decides to let the matter drop. However, several minutes
    later, the same cloud of dust, accompanied by the clatter of hooves,
    rapidly proceeds in the other direction. Not being able to see
    what's behind the dust, and unable to contain his curiosity any
    longer, the newcomer asks:

:   — OK, what the hell was that, Bill?
:   — Oh, that's Uncatchable Joe. Nobody has ever managed to catch him,
    Harry.
:   — Why? Is he so fast, Bill?
:   — Nope, it's just because nobody needs him, Harry. (*variant: nobody
    cares about him*)
    :   The "Uncatchable Joe"  has become an ironic nickname in Russia
        for various difficult-to-find persons (not necessarily
        unimportant ones). It is suggested that the nickname and the
        joke originated from a 1923 satirical novel *An Uncatchable
        Enemy. American Novel* by Mikhail Kozyrev (:ru:Козырев, Михаил
        Яковлевич) which contained a funny song about a Joe who was
        uncatchable because no one needed him.

Jokes about disabilities
------------------------

Jokes set in mental hospitals are just as common in Russian humor as in
the humor of other cultures. However, "punitive psychiatry" was part of
Soviet political repressions, and this method purportedly continues in
today's Russia (see article "Psikhushka"). Therefore, in Russian humor
jokes about the mentally ill often have a political subtext.

:   A lecturer visits the mental hospital and gives a lecture about how
    great communism is. Everybody claps loudly except for one person who
    keeps quiet.\
    The lecturer asks: "Why aren't you clapping?" and the person replies
    "I'm not a psycho, I just work here."

A large number of jokes, arguably unparalleled among other nations, are
about people with acute :wikt:dystrophy|dystrophy. The main topics are
extreme weakness, slowness, leanness, and weightlessness of a dystrophic
patient.

Some of them originated in the infamous Gulag camps. Alexander
Solzhenitsyn in his *Gulag Archipelago* (as well as other writers about
Gulag) wrote that dystrophy was a typical phase in the life of a gulag
inmate. He quotes the following Gulag joke.

:   In order to deny international rumors, Stalin allowed a foreign
    delegation to inspect some Gulag camps. As a result, a foreign
    reporter wrote "a *zek* is lazy, gluttonous, and deceiving".\
    By a misfortune the same reporter landed in a gulag as an inmate
    himself. When released, he wrote "a *zek* is lean, ringing, and
    transparent" (Russian: *tonkiy, zvonkiy and prozrachny*).

Other ones depict scorn of working-class people to intelligentsia, who
were most often physically underdeveloped.

-   Muscular dystrophy patients are playing hide and seek in the
    hospital.\
    "Vovka, where are you?"\
    "I'm here, behind this broomstick!"\
    "Hey, didn't we have an arrangement not to hide behind thick
    objects?"
-   A jolly doctor comes into a dystrophy ward: "Greetings, eagles!" (a
    Russian cliché in addressing e.g. brave soldiers)\
    In reply: "No, we are not. We're only flying because the nurse
    turned the fan on!"
-   A muscular dystrophy patient is lying in bed and shouting: "Nurse!
    Nurse!"\
    "What is it now?"\
    "Kill the fly! It's trampling my chest."

Taboo vocabulary
----------------

The very use of obscene Russian vocabulary, called *mat*, can enhance
the humorous effect of a joke by its emotional impact. Due to the
somewhat different cultural attitude to obscene slang, such an effect is
difficult to render in English. The taboo status often makes *mat*
itself the subject of a joke. One typical plot goes as follows.

:   A construction site expects an inspection from the higher-ups, so a
    foreman warns the boys to watch their tongues. During the
    inspection, a hammer is accidentally dropped from the fourth floor
    right on a worker's head... The punch line is an exceedingly polite,
    classy rebuke from the mouth of the injured, rather than a typically
    expected "Expletive attributive|\#@&%\$!". For example the injured
    worker might say: "Dear co-workers, could you please watch your
    tools a little more carefully, so as to prevent such cases and avoid
    work-place injuries?" In another variant of the joke the punch line
    is "Vasya, please desist in pouring molten tin over my head."

**(L)** Another series of jokes exploits the richness of the *mat*
vocabulary, which can give a substitute to a great many words of
everyday conversation. Other languages often use profanity in a similar
way (like the English *fuck*, for example), but the highly synthetic
grammar of Russian provides for the unambiguity and the outstandingly
great number of various derivations from a single *mat* root. Emil
Draitser points out that linguists explain that the linguistic
properties of the Russian language rich in affixes allows for expression
of a wide variety of feelings and notions using only a few core *mat*
words:

-   An agenda item on working conditions at a trade union meeting of a
    Soviet plant. Locksmith Ivanov takes the floor: "Mother fuckers!...
    Go fuck yourself!... Fuck you and you too again!..." A voice from
    the audience: "Right to the point, Vasya! we won't work without work
    robes!"

As an ultimate joke in this series, the goal is to apply such
substitution to as many words of a sentence as possible while keeping it
meaningful. The following dialog at a construction site between a
foreman and a worker retains a clear meaning even with all of its 14
words being derived from the single obscene word *khuy*. Russian
language proficiency is needed to understand this. Word-by-word:

:   — *Okhuyeli?!* (Have [you] gone mad?!) ''Nakhuya *(why)* dokhuya
    *(so much)* khuyni *(of stuff)* nakhuyarili *(you have loaded up)*?
    Raskhuyarivay *(unload [it])* nakhuy! ''(out of here)
:   — ''Khuli?! ''(What's the problem?) ''Nikhuya! *(No way!)* Nekhuy
    *(No need)* raskhuyarivat *(to unload)*! Nakhuyacheno *([It] got
    loaded)* nekhuyovo! '' (quite well)! *Pokhuyarili!* (Let's go)

Possible, but incomplete translation:

:   — Fuckheads, why the fuck did you fucking load so fucking much of
    this shit? Unfuck it the fuck out of here!
:   — What's the fucking problem?! Fuck no! No fucking need to unfuck!
    It got fucked up fucking well! Let's fucking go!

After this example one may readily believe the following semi-apocryphal
story. An inspection was expected at a Soviet plant to award it the
Quality Mark, so the administration prohibited the usage of *mat*. On
the next day the productivity dropped abruptly. People's Control figured
out the reason: miscommunication. It turned out that workers knew all
the tools and parts only by their *mat*-based names: *khuyovina*,
*pizdyulina*, *khuynyushka*, *khuyatina*, etc. (all of these are loosely
translated as "thing"); the same went for technological processes:
*otkhuyachit* (to detach, cut, disconnect), *zayebenit* (to push
through, force into), *prikhuyachit* (to attach, connect, bond, nail),
*khuynut* (to move slightly, throw, pour), *zakhuyarit* (to throw far
away, to put in deeply) etc.

Another story, possibly apocryphal, relates that during the time of the
Space Race the CIA placed a bug in a Soviet rocket factory to gain
intelligence about the manufacturing process. After 6 months of
listening-in the Americans had learned that Soviet rockets seemed to
consist of only two parts, called *khuy* and *pizda*, and that one goes
into the other.

References
----------

### In English

-   Emil Draitser [*Forbidden
    Laughter*](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0896260453) (Los Angeles:
    Almanac Press, 1980.) ISBN 0-89626-045-3
-   Graham, Seth (2003) [*A Cultural Analysis of the Russo-Soviet
    Anekdot*](http://etd.library.pitt.edu/ETD/available/etd-11032003-192424/unrestricted/grahamsethb_etd2003.pdf).
    Doctoral Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh.
-   Emil Draitser [Taking Penguins to the Movies: Ethnic Humor in
    Russia](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0814323278) (Detroit: Wayne State
    University Press, 1999.) ISBN 0-8143-2327-8
-   [Tiny Revolution Russia: Twentieth Century Soviet and Russian
    History in Anecdotes and Jokes](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0415351731)
-   [Reflective Laughter: Aspects of Humour in Russian Culture (Anthem
    Slavic and Russian Studies)](http://www.amazon.com/dp/1843311194)
-   [Ethnic Humor Around the World: A Comparative
    Analysis](http://www.amazon.com/dp/025321081X)
-   [Consuming Russia: Popular Culture, Sex, and Society since
    Gorbachev](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0822323133), contains an essay
    about Russian jokes
-   Christie Davies, *Jokes and Their Relation to Society* (1998) ISBN
    3-11-016104-4, Chapter 5: "Stupidity and rationality: Jokes from the
    iron cage" (about jokes from beyond the Iron Curtain)
-   [Contemporary Russian Satire: A Genre
    Study](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0521026261)
-   [Laughter through tears: Underground wit, humor, and satire in the
    Soviet Russian Empire](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0949667102)
-   [Is That You Laughing Comrade? the World's Best Russian (Underground
    Jokes)](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0806509945)
-   Rodger Swearingen, [What's so funny,
    comrade?](http://www.amazon.com/dp/B0007DX2Z0) (1961) ASIN
    B0007DX2Z0
-   [The Cambridge Companion to Modern Russian
    Culture](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0822323133); section "Popular
    Culture" discusses Russian "narrative jokes (*anekdot*) and
    *chastushkas*: *... further "wise fool" figures, such as brave Red
    Army commander Chapayev, hippies, Cheburashka and Cornet Rzhevsky
    have replaced Ivan the Fool*
-   "Eros and Pornography in Russian Culture." Edited by Marcus C.
    Levitt and Andrei L. Toporkov. In the Series “Russkaia potaennaia
    literatura.” Ladomir Publishers, Moscow, 1999. 700 p
    ([review](http://www.ejhs.org/volume3/book4.htm)) Section
    "Pornography in Russia today" contains a chapter on contemporary
    Russian humor
-   Draitser, Emil, "The Rise and Fall of the New Russians," in
    *Uncensored? Reinventing Humor and Satire in Post-Soviet Russia* by
    Seth Graham and Olga Mezropova, eds. Slavica Publishers, 2008,
    79-98.

### In Russian

-   "[Eto prosto smeshno, ili, Zerkalo krivogo korolevstva: Anekdoty :
    sistemnyi analiz, sintez i
    klassifikatsiia](http://www.amazon.com/dp/5758803901)"
-   "U Mikrofona Armianskoe Radio" (1995) ISBN 5-87173-001-9
-   [Sotsiologiia iumora: Ocherki](http://www.amazon.com/dp/5201019080)
    (1996) Russian Academy of Science, ISBN 5-201-01908-0
-   [Sovetskii Soiuz v zerkale politicheskogo
    anekdota](http://www.amazon.com/dp/0903868628)

### Other

-   Ilmari Susiluoto
    -   *Työ tyhmästä pitää, venäläisen huumorin aakkoset* ("Only a Fool
        Likes to Work: The ABCs of Russian humour"), Ajatuskustannus,
        2000
    -   *Takaisin Neuvostoliittoon* (2006) ("Back to the USSR") — [A
        review](http://www.hs.fi/english/article/Soviet+nostalgia+lives+on+in+Russian+anecdotes/1135219827950),
        *Helsingin Sanomat*, 9/5/2006 : "Soviet nostalgia lives on in
        Russian anecdotes: Finnish political scientist examines
        post-Soviet humour in new book" (review in English)
-   Radio Yerevan jokes

External links
--------------

-   [Russian humour](http://www.jokebuddha.com/Russian)
-   [One Hundred Russian
    Jokes](http://www.johndclare.net/Russ12_Jokes.htm)
-   [Knock Knock Jokes in
    Russian](http://blogs.transparent.com/russian/are-there-any-good-knock-knock-jokes-in-russian/)

Category:Russian language Category:Russian culture Category:Jokes
Category:Russian comedy and humour Category:Military humor
