**Science fiction and fantasy** have been part of mainstream Russian
literature since the 19th century. Russian fantasy developed from the
centuries-old traditions of Russian mythology and folklore. Russian
science fiction emerged in the mid-19th century and rose to its golden
age during Soviet era, both in cinema and literature, with writers like
Strugatsky brothers, Kir Bulychov, and Mikhail Bulgakov, among others.
With the fall of Iron Curtain, modern Russia experienced a renaissance
of fantasy. Outside modern Russian borders, there's a significant number
of Russophone writers and filmmakers from Ukraine, Belarus and
Kazakhstan, who also made a notable contribution to the genres.

Terminology
-----------

In Russian language, fantasy, science fiction, horror and all other
related genres are considered a part of a larger umbrella term,
*fantastika* (rus. фантастика), roughly equivalent to "speculative
fiction", and are less divided than in the West. Russian term for
science fiction is научная фантастика (*nauchnaya fantastika*), which
can be literally translated as "science fantastique". Since there was
very few adult-oriented fantasy fiction in Soviet times, Russians did
not use a specific term for this genre until Perestroika. Although
Russian language has a literal translation for 'fantasy', that is
фантазия (*fantaziya*), the word refers to a dream or imagination, not
literary genre. Today, Russian publishers and literary criticians use
direct English transcription, фэнтези (*fentezi*). Gothic and
supernatural stories are often referred to as мистика (*mistika*,
Russian for mysticism), a term with no direct equivalent in the West.

Early period
------------

Though secular literature was forming gradually in Russia since the 17th
century, it was not until the late 18th century that European rhetoric
genres were transplanted to native ground, with narrative fiction
techniques open to complex interactions with new scientific and social
ideas. While science fiction did not emerge as a coherent genre until
the early 20th century, many aspects thereof, such as utopia or
imaginary voyage, are found in earlier works by Russian authors.

The first work which is considered a prototype to science fiction is
Fedor Dmitriev-Mamonov's *A Philosopher Nobleman* («Dvoryanin-filosof»,
1769). It is a voltairean *conte philosophique* influenced by
*Micromégas*.

Utopias were a major form of early Russian speculative fiction; the
first generic utopia in Russia was a short story by Alexander Sumarokov,
"A Dream of Happy Society" (1759). Two early examples of utopias in form
of imaginary voyage are Vasily Levshin's *Newest Voyage* (1784, which is
also the first Russian "flight" to the Moon) and Mikhail Shcherbatov's
*Journey to the Land of Ophir*. Pseudo-historical heroic romances in
classical settings (modeled on Fenelon's *Telemaque*) also had a strong
utopian element; examples include works by Fyodor Emin, Mikhail
Kheraskov, Pavel Lvov and Pyotr Zakharyin. *Ancient Night of the
Universe* (1807), an epic poem by Semyon Bobrov, is the first work of
Russian Cosmism.

Some of Faddei Bulgarin's tales are set in the future, others exploited
themes of hollow earth and space flight, as did Osip Senkovsky's
*Fantastic Voyages of Baron Brambeus*. Aleksandr Bestuzhev with his
Gothic stories with German *couleur locale* also was a bestselling
author. Other writers to acquire a Gothic mode were Sergey Lyubetsky,
Vladimir Olin, Alexey K. Tolstoy, Elizaveta Kologrivova, Mikhail
Lermontov ("Stoss").

Closer to mid-19th century a notion of imaginary voyage into outer space
became trivialised enough to be used in popular chapbooks, such as
*Voyage to the Sun and Planet Mercury and All the Visible and Invisible
Worlds* (1832) by Dmitry Sigov, *Correspondence of a Moonman with an
Earthman* (1842) by Pyotr Mashkov, *Voyage to the Moon in a Wonderful
Machine* (1844) by Semyon Dyachkov and *Voyage in the Sun* (1846) by
Demokrit Terpinovich. Authors of popular literature often used fantastic
motifs like magic demons (Rafail Zotov's *Qin-Kiu-Tong*), invisibility
(Ivan Shteven's *Magic Spectacles*), shrinking men (Vasily Alferyev's
*Picture*).

Hoffmann's fantastic tales caused great impact upon many Russian writers
including Nikolay Gogol, Antony Pogorelsky, Nikolay Melgunov, Vladimir
Karlgof, Nikolai Polevoy, Aleksey Tomofeev, Konstantin Aksakov, Vasily
Ushakov. Folklore supernatural tall-tales are stylized by Orest Somov,
Vladimir Olin, Mikhail Zagoskin, Nikolay Bilevich. Alexander Pushkin's
The Queen of Spades (1834) was called "a masterpiece of fantastic art"
by Dostoyevsky. A central figure of the early 19th century is Vladimir
Odoevsky, a romantic writer influenced by E.T.A. Hoffmann, who combined
his vision of the future with faith in scientific and technological
progress. He was also an author of many Gothic tales.

Perhaps the first true science fiction author in Russia was Alexander
Veltman. Along with pseudo-historical romances set in Old Russia and
heavily peopled by fairy-tale characters (*Koschei the Immortal*, 1833)
and modern day hoffmanesque tales blended with satiric moralising (*New
Yemelya or, Metamorphoses*, 1845), in 1836 he published *Predki
Kalimerosa: Aleksandr Filippovich Makedonskii* (The forebears of
Kalimeros: Alexander, son of Philip of Macedon), which has been called
the first original Russian science fiction novel and the first novel to
use time travel. In it the narrator rides to ancient Greece on a
hippogriff, meets Aristotle, and goes on a voyage with Alexander the
Great before returning to the 19th century. *Year 3448* (1833), a
Heliodoric love romance set in the far future, is also
science-fictional; in it a traveler visits the imaginary Balkan country
of Bosphorania, ruled by the righteous Ioann, who devotes all his time
and effort to the good of his people. There are descriptions of the
social and technological advances of the 35th century, including popular
festivals and expeditions to the South Pole.

[File:Портрет](File:Портрет) Гоголя.jpg|Nikolai Gogol <File:Kiprensky>
Pushkin.jpg|Alexander Pushkin <File:Aleksey> K Tolstoy.jpg|Alexey K.
Tolstoy <File:Odoevsky> vladimir.jpg|Vladimir Odoevsky <File:Bulgarin>
Faddei.jpg|Faddei Bulgarin

Late 19th - early 20th century
------------------------------

The second half of the century, particularly the 1860-80s are defined by
a growing interest in realism. However, literary fantasies with a
scientific rationale by Nikolai Akhsharumov and Nikolai Vagner stand out
during this period, as well as Ivan Turgenev's "mysterious tales" and
Vera Zhelikhovsky's occult fiction.

Mikhail Mikhailov's story "Beyond History" (published posthumously in
1869), a pre-Darwinian fantasy on the descent of man, is an early
example of prehistoric fiction. Later fictional accounts of prehistoric
men were often written by anthropologists and popular science writers
("Prehistoric Man", 1890, by Wilhelm Bitner, *The First Artist*, 1907,
by Dmitry Pakhomov, *Tale of a Mammoth and an Ice-Man*, 1909, by Pyotr
Dravert, *Dragon's Victims*, 1910, by Vladimir Bogoraz). Mikhail
Saltykov-Shchedrin's satires use a fantastic and grotesque element (*The
History of a Town* and prose fables). The plot of *Animal Mutiny*
(published 1917) by historian Nikolay Kostomarov is built on the
assumption similar to Orwell's *Animal Farm*.

Some of Fyodor Dostoevsky's shorter works also use fantasy: *The Dream
of a Ridiculous Man* (a story about the corruption of the utopian
society on another planet), a doppelgänger novella *The Double: A
Petersburg Poem*, mesmeric *The Landlady*, a comic horror story *Bobok*.
Dostoevsky's magazine *Vremya* was first to publish Russian translation
of Edgar Allan Poe's The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket in
1861; three other stories by Poe were published with Dostoevsky's own
foreword (defining Poe's method as "material fantastic"). Many prose
works of Symbolist Valery Bryusov may be classified as science fiction .

Prose of Alexander Kondratyev who was close to Symbolism included
"mythological novel" *Satyress* (1907) and collection of "mythological
stories" *White Goat* (1908), both based on Greek myths. *Journeys and
Adventures of Nicodemus the Elder* (1917) by another minor Symbolist
Aleksey Skaldin is a Gnostic fantasy.

### Utopias

Nikolai Chernyshevsky's influential *What Is to Be Done? (novel)|What Is
to Be Done?* (1863) included an utopian dream of the far future, which
became a prototype for many socialist utopias. A noted example of those
is the duology by Marxist philosopher and Lenin's adversary Alexander
Bogdanov, *Red Star* and *Engineer Menni*. Some plays of another eminent
Marxist, Anatoly Lunacharsky, propone his philosophical ideas in
fantastic disguise (collection of his plays was called *Ideas in
Masques*). Other examples of socialist utopias include *Diary of André*
(1897) by pseudonymous A. Va-sky, *On Another Planet* (1901) by Porfiry
Infantyev, *Spring Feast* (1910) by Nikolay Oliger. Alexander Kuprin's
short story of the same kind, *Toast* (1907), became very well known.

Among others, Vladimir Solovyov wrote *Tale of the Anti-Christ* (1900),
an ecumenical utopia. *Earthly Paradise* (1903) by Konstantin
Mereschkowski is an anthropological utopia which pays no attention to
technical progress or social justice. \* *Great War Between Men and
Women* (1913) by Sergey Solomin and *Women Uprisen and Defeated* (1914)
by Polish writer Ferdynand Antoni Ossendowski (written and published in
Russian) tell stories of a feminist revolution. Other feminist utopias
include short farces *Women on Mars* (1906) by Victor Bilibin and *Women
Problem* (1913) by Nadezhda Teffi. *In Half a Century* (1902) by Sergey
Sharapov is a patriarchal Slavophile utopia, and *Land of Bliss* (1891)
by Crimean Tatar educator Ismail Gasprinski is a Muslim utopia.

Voluminous *A Created Legend* (1914) by another Symbolist Fyodor Sologub
is a freaky utopia full of science fictional wonders close to magic.
Andrei Bely's Petersburg (1914) depicts a fantastic atmosphere of
imperial city full of mists, dreams and illusions. In his *The Moscow
Eccentric* (1926) Professor Korobkin theoretically deduces a method of
nuclear fission. In his short prose piece "Argonauts" an expedition to
the Sun takes place in the 23rd century.

### Genre fiction

Entertainment fiction adopts scientistic themes. Among them,
resurrection of an ancient Roman (*Extraordinary Story of a Resurrected
Pompeian* by Vasily Avenarius), global disaster (*Struggle of the
Worlds*, 1900, by N. Kholodny; *Under the Comet*, 1910, by Simon
Belsky), mindreading devices (a recurring theme in works by Andrey
Zarin), Antarctic city-states (*Under the Glass Dome*, 1914, by Sergey
Solomin), an elixir of longevity (*Brothers of the Saint Cross*, 1898,
by Nikolay Shelonsky), Atlantis ("Atlantis", 1913, by Larisa Reisner).

Spaceflight remained a central science fiction topic since the 1890s in
*In the Ocean of Stars* (1892) by Anany Lyakide, *In the Moon* (1893)
and *Dreams of Earth and Skies* (1895) by Konstantin Tsiolkovsky,
*Voyage to Mars* (1901) by Leonid Bogoyavlensky, "In Space" (1908) by
Nikolay Morozov, *Sailing Ether* (1913) by Boris Krasnogorsky with its
sequel, *Islands of Ethereal Ocean* (1914, co-authored by prominent
astronomer Daniil Svyatsky).

In the 1910s Russian audience grew interested in horror fiction.
*Fire-Blossom*, a supernatural thriller by prolific writer Alexander
Amfiteatrov became a success. Vera Kryzhanovsky's occult romances that
combined science fiction and reactionary elitist utopia enjoyed enormous
popularity at the time. Bram Stoker's Dracula was imitated by
pseudonymous "b. Olshevri" (= "more lies" in Russian) in *Vampires*,
even before the original was translated to Russian. Early Alexander
Grin's stories are mostly psychological horror (he borrowed much from
Ambrose Bierce), though later on his writing drifted to less
conventional and more literary kinds of fantasy.

Possible miracles of technical progress were regularly described in form
of fiction by scientists: "Wonders of Electricity" (1884) by electric
engineer Vladimir Chikolev, *Automatic Underground Railway* (1902) by
Alexander Rodnykh, "Billionaire's Testament" (1904) by biology professor
Porfiry Bakhmetyev. Future war stories (indistinguishable from their
English, German, and French analogues) were produced mostly by the
military (*Cruiser "Russian Hope"*, 1887, and *Fatal War of 18..*, 1889,
by retired navy officer Alexander Belomor; *Big Fist or Chinese-European
War*, 1900, by K. Golokhvastov, *Queen of the World* (1908) and *Kings
of the Air* (1909) by another retired navy officer Vladimir Semyonov;
"War of Nations 1921-1923" (1912) by Ix, *War of the "Ring" with the
"Union"* (1913) by P. R-tsky, *The End of the War*, 1915, by Lev
Zhdanov). *Threat to the World* (1914) by Ivan Ryapasov (who styled
himself "Ural Jules Verne") is very much alike Jules Verne's The Begum's
Fortune, but the arch-enemy is an Englishman. Jules Verne was so widely
read that Anton Chekhov has written a parody on him, and Konstantin
Sluchevsky produced a sequel - "Captain Nemo in Russia" (1898).

[File:Tsiolkovsky.jpg|Konstantin](File:Tsiolkovsky.jpg|Konstantin)
Tsiolkovsky [File:Александр](File:Александр) Грин.jpg|Alexander Grin
<File:A> A Bogdanov.jpg|Alexander Bogdanov <File:Valery> Bryusov c.
1900.jpg|Valery Bryusov

Soviet era
----------

### Soviet science fiction

Soviet era was the golden age of Russian science fiction. Soviet writers
were innovative, numerous and prolific, despite limitations set up by
state censorship. Both Russian and foreign writers of science fiction
enjoyed mainstream popularity in the Soviet Union, and many books were
adapted for film and animation.

#### Early Soviet era

Birth of Soviet science fiction was spurred by scientific revolution,
industrialisation, mass education and other dramatic social changes that
followed the Russian Revolution. Early Soviet authors from 1920's, such
as Alexander Belayev, Grigory Adamov, Vladimir Obruchev, Alexey N.
Tolstoy, stack to hard science fiction. They openly embraced influence
from genre's western classics, such as Jules Verne, Arthur Conan Doyle
and especially H. G. Wells, who was a socialist and sympathizer of
Soviet Russia. Science fiction books from 1920s included science
predictions, adventure, space travel, often with a hue of *working
class* agenda and satire against capitalism. Alexey N. Tolstoy's
*Aelita* (1923), one of the most influential books of the era, featured
two Russians raising a revolution on Mars. Tolstoy's *Engineer Garin's
Death Ray* (1926) follows a mad scientist who plans to take over the
world, and he's eventually welcomed by capitalists. Similarly, main
antagonist of Belayev's *The Air Seller* (1929) is a megalomaniac
capitalist who plots to steal all the world's atmosphere. Belayev's
*Battle in Ether* (1928) is about a future world war, fought between
communist Europe and capitalist America. Soviet authors were also
interested in the distant past. Belayev described his view of
"historical" Atlantis in *The Last Man from Atlantis* (1926), and
Obruchev is best known for *Plutonia* (written in 1915, before
Revolution, but only published in 1924), set inside hollow Earth where
dinosaurs and other extinct species survived, as well as for his other
"lost world" novel, *Sannikov Land* (1924).

Two notable exclusions from Soviet 'Wellsian' tradition were Yevgeny
Zamyatin, author of dystopian novel *We* (1924), and Mikhail Bulgakov,
who contributed to science fiction with *Heart of a Dog* (1925), *The
Fatal Eggs* (1925) and *Ivan Vasilyevich: Back to the Future|Ivan
Vasilyevich* (1936). The two used science fiction for social satire
rather than scientistic prediction, and challenged the traditional
communist worldview. Some of their books were refused or even banned and
only became officially published in 1980s. Nevertheless, Zamyatin and
especially Bulgakov became relatively well-known through circulation of
fan-made copies.

The following Stalin's era, from mid-1930's to early 1950's, saw a
period of stagnation in Soviet science fiction, because of heavy
censorship that forced the writers to adopt socialist realism cliches.
Science fiction of this period is called "close aim". Instead of distant
future, it was set in "tomorrow", and limited itself to anticipation of
industrial achievements, inventions and travels within Solar system. The
top "close aim" writers were Alexander Kazantsev, Georgy Martynov,
Vladimir Savchenko and Georgy Gurevich. In films the "close aim" era
lasted longer, and many films based on "close aim" books and scripts
were made in 1950's and 1960's. Some of these films, namely *Planet of
the Storms* (1962) and *Battle Beyond the Sun* (1959), were pirated,
re-edited and released in the West under different titles.

#### Late Soviet era

In the second half of the 20th century, Soviet science fiction authors,
inspired by the Thaw period of 1950-60's and the country's space
pioneering, developed a more varied and complex approach. The liberties
of genre offered Soviet writers a loophole for free expression. Social
science fiction, concerned with philosophy, ethics, utopian and
dystopian ideas, became the prevalent subgenre. Most of Soviet writers
still portrayed the future Earth optimistically, as a communist utopia -
some did it frankly, some to please publishers and avoid censorship.
Postapocalyptic and dystopian plots were usually placed outside Earth —
on underdeveloped planets, distant past, parallel worlds. Nevertheless,
the settings occasionally bore allusion of the real world, and could
serve as a satire of contemporary society.

The breakthrough is considered to have been started with Ivan Yefremov's
*Andromeda* (1957), an utopia set in very distant future. Yefremov arose
to fame with his utopian views on future, as well as on Ancient Greece
in his historical novels. He was soon followed by a duo of brothers
Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, who have taken a more critical approach:
their books included darker themes and social satire. Strugatskies are
best known for their Noon Universe novels, such as *Hard to be a God*
(1964) and *Prisoners of Power* (1969). A recurring theme in
Strugatskies' fiction were progressors: agents of utopian future Earth
who secretly spread scientistic and social progress to underdeveloped
planets. Progressors often failed, bitterly recognizing that society is
not ready to communism. The brothers are also credited for the Soviet's
first science fantasy, the *Monday Begins on Saturday* trilogy (1964),
and their post-apocalyptic novel *Roadside Picnic* (1971) is often
believed to have been a prediction of Chernobyl disaster. Another
notable late Soviet writer was Kir Bulychov. His books featured time
travel and parallel worlds, and themes like antimilitarism and
environment protection.

Space opera subgenre was less developed, because both state censors and
"highbrow" intelligentsia writers watched it unfavorably. Nevertheless,
there were moderately successful attempts to adapt space westerns to
Soviet soil. The first was Alexander Kolpakov with "Griada" (1960),
after came Sergey Snegov with *Humans as Gods* trilogy (1966—1977),
among others.

A specific branch of both science fiction and children's books appeared
in mid-Soviet era: the children's science fiction. It was meant to
educate children while enterteining them. The star of the genre was
Bulychov, who, along with his adult books, created *Alisa Selezneva*,
children's space adventure series about a teenage girl from the future.
Others include Nikolay Nosov with his books about dwarf Neznayka, Evgeny
Veltistov, who wrote about robot boy Electronic, Vitaly Melentyev, Yan
Larri, Vladislav Krapivin, Vitaly Gubarev.

#### Films and other media

Soviet cinema developed a tradition of science fiction films, with
directors like Pavel Klushantsev, Andrey Tarkovsky, Konstantin
Lopushansky, Richard Viktorov and Gennady Tischenko.

Many science fiction books, especially children's, were made into films,
animation and TV. The most adapted Russian SF author was Bulychov; of
the numerous films based on *Alisa Selezneva* stories, animation
*Mystery of the Third Planet* (1981) is probably the most popular. Other
Bulychov-based films include *Per Aspera Ad Astra* (1981), *Guest from
the Future* (1985), *Two Tickets to India* (1985), *The Pass* (1988) and
*The Witches Cave* (1990). Andrey Tarkovsky's *Stalker* (1979) is
written by Strugatskies and is loosely based on their *Roadside Picnic*;
there were also less successful films based on *Dead Mountaineer's
Hotel* (1979) and *Hard to Be a God* (1989). *Aelita* (1924) was the
first Soviet SF film, and *Engineer Garin* was made into film twice, in
1965 and in 1973. *Amphibian Man* (1962), *The Andromeda Nebula* (1967),
*Ivan Vasilyevich: Back to the Future|Ivan Vasilyevich* (1973), Heart of
a Dog (1988), *Sannikov's Land* (1974) and *Electronic* (1980) were
filmed as well.

There were also numerous adaptations of foreign science fiction books,
most frequently, by Jules Verne, Stanislaw Lem and Ray Bradbury. Of the
movies based on original scripts, the comedy *Kin-dza-dza!* (1986) and
children's space opera duology *Moscow-Cassiopeia* (1973) and *Teens in
the Universe* (1974) should be noted.

Despite genre's popularity, Soviet Union had a very few media dedicated
solely to science fiction, and most of it were fanzines, released by SF
fan clubs. SF short stories were usually present in either popular
science magazines, such as *Tekhnika Molodezhi*, *Vokrug sveta* and
*Uralsky Sledopyt*, or in literary antologies, such as *Mir
Priklyucheniy*, that also included adventure, history and mystery.

### Soviet fantasy and magic realism

Fantasy fiction in the Soviet Union was represented primarily by
children tales and stage plays. Some of the early Soviet children's
prose was loose adaptations of foreign fairy tales unknown in
contemporary Russia. Alexey N. Tolstoy wrote *Buratino*, a light-hearted
and shortened adaptation of Carlo Collodi's *Pinocchio*. Alexander
Volkov introduced fantasy fiction to Soviet children with his loose
translation of Frank L. Baum's *The Wonderful Wizard of Oz*, published
as *The Wizard of the Emerald City*, and then wrote a series of five
sequels, unrelated to Baum. Another notable author was Lazar Lagin with
*Old Khottabych*, a children's tale about an Arab genie Khottabych bound
to serve a Soviet schoolboy.

Any sort of literature that dealt seriously with the supernatural,
either horror, adult-oriented fantasy or magic realism, was unwelcomed
by Soviet censors. Until 1980's very few books in these genres were
written, and even fewer were published, although earlier books, such as
by Gogol, were not banned. Of the rare exceptions, Bulgakov in *Master
and Margarita* (not published in author's lifetime), Strugatskies in
*Monday Begins on Saturday* and Vladimir Orlov in *Altist Danilov*
introduced magic and mystical creatures into contemporary Soviet reality
in a satirical and fabulous manner. Another exception was early Soviet
writer Alexander Grin, who wrote romantic tales, both realistic and
fantastic. Magic and other fantasy themes occasionally appeared in
theatrical plays by Evgeny Shvarts, Grigory Gorin and Mikhail Bulgakov.
Their plays were family-oriented fables, where supernatural elements
served as an allegory. Supernatural horror genre, by contrast, was
almost completely eliminated by censors' demands for every media to be
modest and family-friendly.

Nevertheless, fantasy, mythology and folklore were often present in
Soviet film and animation, especially children's. There were numerous
fairy tale films by Alexander Rou and Alexander Ptushko, as well as
animated features by Lev Atamanov, Ivan Ivanov-Vano, Alexandra
Snezhko-Blotskaya. Most of them were adaptations of traditional fairy
tales, both Russian and foreign, but there were also many adaptations of
classical stories by Alexander Pushkin, Nikolai Gogol, Rudyard Kipling,
Astrid Lindgren, Alan Alexander Milne, among many others. Late Soviet
era saw a number of adult fabulous films, close to magic realism. They
were written by Shvartz (*An Ordinary Miracle, Cain XVIII*), Gorin
(*Formula of Love, The Very Same Munchhausen*), and Strugatskies
(*Magicians*), most of them were directed by Mark Zakharov.

### Most notable Soviet writers

<File:Alex> Belayev.jpg|Alexander Belayev Image:ANTolstoy.jpg|Alexey N.
Tolstoy Image:Bulgakov1910s.jpg|Mikhail Bulgakov <File:Boris> Strugatsky
Seminar 20060109 02.jpg|Boris Strugatsky <File:Kir> Bulychev
1997.jpg|Kir Bulychov

Post-Soviet period
------------------

### Literature

From 1990s to this day, fantasy and science fiction are among the
best-selling literature in Russia.

Fall of the state censorship in late 1980s allowed to publish numerous
translations of Western books and films that were previously unreleased
in Russia. A new wave of writers rediscovered high fantasy and was
influenced with John R. R. Tolkien, Robert E. Howard and, more recently,
George R. R. Martin. As a result, the popularity of traditional "hard"
science fiction relatively faded, and fantasy, with distinctive Western
features, became the predominant genre. While the majority of fantasy
writers, such as Nick Perumov, Vera Kamsha, Alexey Pekhov, Tony
Vilgotsky follow the Western tradition with its archetypal Norse or
Anglo-Saxon settings, some others, most notably Maria Semenova and Yuri
Nikitin, prefer Russian mythology as inspiration. Comic fantasy is also
popular, with authors such as Max Frei, Andrey Belyanin and Olga
Gromyko. Urban and gothic fantasy, virtually absent in Soviet Union,
became mainstream in modern Russia after the success of Sergey
Lukyanenko's *Night Watch* and Vadim Panov's *Secret City*. Magic
realism is represented by Maria Galina and Lyudmila Petrushevskaya.

In science fiction, with communist censorship gone, many various
portrayals of future appeared, including dystopias. Post-apocalyptic
fiction, time travel and alternate history are among the most popular
genres, represented by authors like Vyacheslav Rybakov, Yuri Nikitin,
among many others. Overuse of fish-out-of-water plots for time travel
and parallel worlds led Russian SF&F journalists to coin the ironic slur
*popadanets* (Rus. попаданец, lit. *getter*) for such characters. There
are still many writers of traditional space-related science fiction
including space operas, such as Alexander Zorich (*Tomorrow War*
series), Lukyanenko (*Lord from Planet Earth*), Andrey Livadny, among
others. Late 2000s and early 2010s saw a rise of Russian Steampunk, with
such books as Alexey Pekhov's *Mockingbird* (2009), Vadim Panov's
*Hermeticon* (2011), and Gray F. Green's (a collective pen name)
*Cetopolis* (2012).

A large part of modern Russian SF&F is written in Ukraine, especially in
its "sci-fi capital", Kharkiv, home to H. L. Oldie, Alexander Zorich,
Yuri Nikitin and Andrey Valentinov. Many others hail from Kiev,
including Marina and Sergey Dyachenko and Vladimir Arenev. Belarussian
authors, such as Olga Gromyko, Kirill Benediktov, Yuri Brayder and
Nikolai Chadovich, also contributed to the genres. Some authors, namely
Kamsha, Dyachenkos and Frei, were born in Ukraine and moved to Russia at
some point. Most Ukrainian and Belarussian SF&F authors write in
Russian, which gives them access to a broad Russophone audience of the
post-Soviet countries, and usually publish their books via Russian
publishers such as Eksmo, Azbuka and AST.

In the post-soviet fantasy and science fiction, the extensive
serializing of successful formulas has become usual. Most notable are
the two postapocalyptic book series based on *S.T.A.L.K.E.R.: Shadow of
Chernobyl|S.T.A.L.K.E.R.* computer game and *Metro 2033* novel, both of
which featured a well-developed universe. *S.T.A.L.K.E.R.* book series'
features are heavy branding and almost negligible influence of the
actual writer's name on individual novels (also, a TV show is in
development). And though *Metro 2033* raised its creator Dmitry
Glukhovsky to national fame, it quickly developed into a franchise, with
over 15 books published by various authors and spanned a tie-in
videogame.

### Other media

Production of science fiction films and fantasy films in modern Russia
dropped in comparison to the Soviet cinema, due to high costs of visual
effects. In 2000's, however, Russia produced a number of high budget
films. Most of them were based on books, notably by Sergey Lukyanenko
(*Night Watch, Day Watch, Asiris Nuna*), Bulychov (*Alice's Birthday*),
Strugatskies (*The Inhabited Island, Ugly Swans*), Semenova (*Wolfhound
of the Grey Hound Clan*). A number of children's fairy tale films and
animations were based on Russian mythology and history, most of them by
Melnitsa Animation Studio. Very few films based on original scripts were
made, notable exceptions being mockumentary *First on the Moon* and
superhero film *Black Lightning*. Russian video game developers also
contributed to the genres. Examples include fantasy-based MMORPG Allods
Online, turn-based strategy Etherlords and science fiction RTS
Perimeter, among many others.

SF&F magazines, websites and other media became widespread in modern
Russia. The largest of magazines are *Mir Fantastiki, Esli and Polden
XXI vek*. Ukrainian magazines, such as *RBG-Azimuth* or *Realnost
Fantastiki*, are mostly Russophone. Among websites, Fantlab.ru and
Mirf.ru are considered the most influential, according to Roscon Award.

### Notable writers

<File:Lukianenko>, Sergey.jpg|Sergey Lukyanenko [File:Мария](File:Мария)
Семёнова.jpg|Maria Semenova <File:Nick> Perumov.png|Nick Perumov
<File:Vera> Kamsha MOW Feb-2011.jpg|Vera Kamsha <File:Vadim> panov
2010.jpg|Vadim Panov <File:H>. L. Oldie.jpg|H. L. Oldie (Dmitry Gromov
and Oleg Ladyzhensky) <File:Yana> dmitry 2010.jpg|Alexander Zorich (Yana
Botsman and Dmitry Gordevsky) <File:Marina> and Sergey
Dyachenko.jpg|Marina and Sergey Dyachenko <File:Dmitry> Glukhovsky MOW
03-2011.jpg|Dmitry Glukhovsky <File:Max> Frei.jpg|Max Frei (Svetlana
Martynchik)

Anthologies
-----------

-   *Soviet Science Fiction*, Collier Books, 1962, 189pp.
-   *More Soviet Science Fiction*, Collier Books, 1962, 190pp.
-   *Russian Science Fiction*, ed. Robert Magidoff, New York University
    Press, 1964.
-   *Russian Science Fiction, 1968*, ed. Robert Magidoff, New York
    University Press, 1968.
-   *Russian Science Fiction, 1969*, ed. Robert Magidoff, New York
    University Press, 1969.
-   *New Soviet Science Fiction*, Macmillan, 1979, ISBN 0-02-578220-7,
    xi+297pp.
-   *Pre-Revolutionary Russian Science Fiction*: An Anthology (Seven
    Utopias and a Dream), ed. Leland Fetzer, Ardis, 1982, ISBN
    0-88233-595-2, 253pp.
-   *Worlds Apart* : An Anthology of Russian Science Fiction and
    Fantasy, ed. Alexander Levitsky, Overlook, 2007, ISBN 1-58567-819-8,
    656pp.

Literature
----------

-   Darko Suvin. Russian Science Fiction, 1956-1974: A Bibliography.
    Elizabethtown, NY: Dragon Press, 1976.
-   J. P. Glad, Extrapolations from Dystopia: A Critical Study of Soviet
    Science Fiction Princeton: Kingston Press, 1982. 223 p.
-   Scott R. Samuel, Soviet Science Fiction: New Critical Approaches.
    Ph. D. Dissertation, Stanford University, 1982. 134 p.
-   Nadezhda L. Petreson, Fantasy and Utopia in the Contemporary Soviet
    Novel, 1976-1981. Ph. D. Dissertation, Indiana University, 1986. 260
    p.
-   Karla A. Cruise. Soviet Science Fiction, 1909-1926: Symbols,
    Archetypes and Myths. Master's Thesis, Princeton University, 1988.
    71 p.
-   Matthew D. B. Rose, Russian and Soviet Science Fiction: The
    Neglected Genre. Master's Thesis, The University of Alberta
    (Canada), 1988.
-   Richard Stites, Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and
    Experimental Life in the Russian Revolution. Oxford UP, 1989.
-   Richard P. Terra and Robert M. Philmus. Russian and Soviet Science
    Fiction in English Translation: A Bibliography, in: Science Fiction
    Studies \#54 = Volume 18, Part 2 = July 1991
-   Anindita Banerjee. The Genesis and Evolution of Science Fiction in
    fin de siecle Russia, 1880-1921. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
    California, Los Angeles, 2000. 324 p.
-   Vitalii Kaplan. A Look Behind the Wall: A Topography of Contemporary
    Russian Science Fiction, Russian Studies in Literature 38(3): 62-84.
    Summer 2002. Also in: Russian Social Science Review 44(2): 82-104.
    March/April 2003.
-   Science Fiction Studies \#94 = Volume 31, Part 3 = November 2004.
    SPECIAL ISSUE: SOVIET SCIENCE FICTION: THE THAW AND AFTER.
-   Park Joon-Sung. Literary Reflections of the Future War: A Study of
    Interwar Soviet Literature of Military Anticipation. Ph. D.
    Dissertation, University of Michigan, 2004. 198 p.

References
----------

External links
--------------

-   [Ultimate Science Fiction Web
    Guide](http://www.magicdragon.com/UltimateSF/countriesRZ.html#COUNTRIES-RUSSIA)
-   [Soviet science fiction, in Britannica
    Online](http://www.britannica.com/eb/article-235721/science-fiction)
-   [Vyacheslav IVANOV. RUSSIAN SCIENCE FICTION. Course in UCLA
    Department of Slavic Languages and literatures, Winter
    2007](http://kogni.narod.ru/sfiction.htm)
-   ["IN THE LIGHT OF THE SILVERY SPUTNIK". Notes on Soviet Science
    Fiction, Soviet Survey. January-March,1958. I--PAST AND PRESENT By
    Walter Z. Laqueur; II -- FANTASY AND REALITY By Vera Alexandrova;
    III - EAST AND WEST By Zeev ben
    Shlomo](http://files.osa.ceu.hu/holdings/300/8/3/text/56-1-360.shtml)
-   [Elana Gomel. Science Fiction in Russia: From Utopia to New
    Age](http://www.depauw.edu/sfs/backissues/79/current%20trends.html)
-   ["Russian and East European Science Fiction Resources",
    2010](http://uiuc.libguides.com/aecontent.php?pid=63362&sid=471636)
    - Slavic Reference Service

Category:Russian science fiction| Category:Soviet science fiction|
Category:Russian fantasy| Category:Science fiction by nationality
