Image:Tolstoy and chekhov.jpg|thumb|270px|Chekhov and Tolstoy, 1901

**Russian literature** refers to the literature of Russia or its émigrés
and to the Russian-language literature of several independent nations
once a part of what was historically Rus', Russia or the Soviet Union.

Roots of Russian literature can be traced to the Middle Ages, when epics
and chronicles in Old Russian were composed. By the Age of
Enlightenment, literature had grown in importance, and from the early
1830s, Russian literature underwent an astounding golden age in poetry,
prose, and drama. After the Revolution of 1917, Russian literature split
into Soviet and white émigré parts. Soviet Union assured universal
literacy and highly developed book printing industry but also carried
out ideological censorship.

Russian authors significantly contributed almost to all known genres of
the literature. Russia had five Nobel Prize in literature laureates. As
of 2011, Russia was the fourth largest book producer in the world in
terms of published titles. A popular folk saying claims Russians are
"the world's most reading nation".

Early history
-------------

Old Russian literature consists of several masterpieces written in the
Old Russian language (not to be confused with the contemporaneous Church
Slavonic). Anonymous works of this nature include *The Tale of Igor's
Campaign* and *Praying of Daniel the Immured*. Hagiographies (, *zhitiya
svyatykh*, "lives of the saints") formed a popular genre of the Old
Russian literature. *Life of Alexander Nevsky* offers a well-known
example. Other Russian literary monuments include *Zadonschina*,
*Physiologist*, *Synopsis* and *A Journey Beyond the Three Seas*.
Bylinas – oral folk epics – fused Christian and pagan traditions.
Medieval Russian literature had an overwhelmingly religious character
and used an adapted form of the Church Slavonic language with many South
Slavic elements. The first work in colloquial Russian, the autobiography
of the archpriest Avvakum, emerged only in the mid-17th century.

18th century
------------

After taking the throne at the end of the 17th century, Peter the
Great's influence on the Russian culture would extend far into the 18th
century. Peter's reign during the beginning of the 18th century
initiated a series of modernizing changes in Russian literature. The
reforms he implemented encouraged Russian artists and scientists to make
innovations in their crafts and fields with the intention of creating an
economy and culture comparable. Peter's example set a precedent for the
remainder of the 18th century as Russian writers began to form clear
ideas about the proper use and progression of the Russian language.
Through their debates regarding versification of the Russian language
and tone of Russian literature, the writers in the first half of the
18th century were able to lay foundation for the more poignant, topical
work of the late 18th century.

Satirist Antiokh Dmitrievich Kantemir, 1708–1744, was one of the
earliest Russian writers not only to praise the ideals of Peter I's
reforms but the ideals of the growing Enlightenment movement in Europe.
Kantemir's works regularly expressed his admiration for Peter, most
notably in his epic dedicated to the emperor entitled *Petrida*. More
often, however, Kantemir indirectly praised Peter's influence through
his satiric criticism of Russia's “superficiality and obscurantism,”
which he saw as manifestations of the backwardness Peter attempted to
correct through his reforms. Kantemir honored this tradition of reform
not only through his support for Peter, but by initiating a decade-long
debate on the proper syllabic versification using the Russian language.

Vasily Kirillovich Trediakovsky, a poet, playwright, essayist,
translator and contemporary to Antiokh Kantemir, also found himself
deeply entrenched in Enlightenment conventions in his work with the
Russian Academy of Sciences and his groundbreaking translations of
French and classical works to the Russian language. A turning point in
the course of Russian literature, his translation of Paul Tallemant's
work *Voyage to the Isle of Love*, was the first to use the Russian
vernacular as opposed the formal and outdated Church-Slavonic. This
introduction set a precedent for secular works to be composed in the
vernacular, while sacred texts would remain in Church-Slavonic. However,
his work was often incredibly theoretical and scholarly, focused on
promoting the versification of the language with which he spoke.

While Trediakovsky's approach to writing is often described as highly
erudite, the young writer and scholarly rival to Trediakovsky, Alexander
Petrovich Sumarokov, 1717–1777, was dedicated to the styles of French
classicism. Sumarokov's interest in the form of French literature
mirrored his devotion to the westernizing spirit of Peter the Great's
age. Although he often disagreed with Trediakovsky, Sumarokov also
advocated the use of simple, natural language in order to diversify the
audience and make more efficient use of the Russian language. Like his
colleagues and counterparts, Sumarokov extolled the legacy of Peter I,
writing in his manifesto *Epistle on Poetry*, “The great Peter hurls his
thunder from the Baltic shores, the Russian sword glitters in all
corners of the universe”. Peter the Great's policies of westernization
and displays of military prowess naturally attracted Sumarokov and his
contemporaries.

Mikhail Vasilyevich Lomonosov, in particular, expressed his gratitude
for and dedication to Peter's legacy in his unfinished *Peter the
Great*, Lomonosov's works often focused on themes of the awe-inspiring,
grandeur nature, and was therefore drawn to Peter because of the
magnitude of his military, architectural, and cultural feats. In
contrast to Sumarokov's devotion to simplicity, Lomonosov favored a
belief in a hierarchy of literary styles divided into high, middle, and
low. This style facilitated Lomonosov's grandiose, high minded writing
and use of both vernacular and Church-Slavonic.

The influence of Peter I and debates over the function and form of
literature as it related to the Russian language in the first half of
the 18th century set a stylistic precedent for the writers during the
reign of Catherine the Great in the second half of the century. However,
the themes and scopes of the works these writers produced were often
more poignant, political and controversial. Alexander Nikolayevich
Radishchev, for example, shocked the Russian public with his depictions
of the socio-economic condition of the serfs. Empress Catherine II
condemned this portrayal, forcing Radishchev into exile in Siberia.

Others, however, picked topics less offensive to the autocrat. Nikolay
Karamzin, 1766–1826, for example, is known for his advocacy of Russian
writers adopting traits in the poetry and prose like a heightened sense
of emotion and physical vanity, considered to be feminine at the time as
well as supporting the cause of female Russian writers. Karamzin's call
for male writers to write with femininity was not in accordance with the
Enlightenment ideals of reason and theory, considered masculine
attributes. His works were thus not universally well received; however,
they did reflect in some areas of society a growing respect for, or at
least ambivalence toward, a female ruler in Catherine the Great. This
concept heralded an era of regarding female characteristics in writing
as an abstract concept linked with attributes of frivolity, vanity and
pathos.

Some writers, on the other hand, were more direct in their praise for
Catherine II. Gavrila Romanovich Derzhavin, famous for his odes, often
dedicated his poems to Empress Catherine II. In contrast to most of his
contemporaries, Derzhavin was highly devoted to his state; he served in
the military, before rising to various roles in Catherine II's
government, including secretary to the Empress and Minister of Justice.
Unlike those who took after the grand style of Mikhail Lomonosov and
Alexander Sumarokov, Derzhavin was concerned with the minute details of
his subjects.

Denis Fonvizin, an author primarily of comedy, approached the subject of
the Russian nobility with an angle of critique. Fonvizin felt the
nobility should be held to the standards they were under the reign of
Peter the Great, during which the quality of devotion to the state was
rewarded. His works criticized the current system for rewarding the
nobility without holding them responsible for the duties they once
performed. Using satire and comedy, Fonvizin supported a system of
nobility in which the elite were rewarded based upon personal merit
rather than the hierarchal favoritism that was rampant during Catherine
the Great's reign.

Image:Poet Prince Antiokh Kantemir .jpg|Antioche Cantemir
Image:Lomonosovportrait.jpg|Mikhail Lomonosov Image:Sumarokov by
A.Losenko.jpg|Alexander Sumarokov Image:Vladimir Borovikovsky 001
(portrait of Gavrila Derzhavin).jpg|Gavrila Derzhavin Image:Radishchev
color.jpg|Alexander Radishchev Image:Tropinin karamzin.JPG|Nikolay
Karamzin Image:Ivan Krylov.jpg|Ivan Krylov

Golden Age
----------

The 19th century is traditionally referred to as the "Golden Era" of
Russian literature. Romanticism permitted a flowering of especially
poetic talent: the names of Vasily Zhukovsky and later that of his
protégé Alexander Pushkin came to the fore. Pushkin is credited with
both crystallizing the literary Russian language and introducing a new
level of artistry to Russian literature. His best-known work is a novel
in verse, *Eugene Onegin*. An entire new generation of poets including
Mikhail Lermontov, Yevgeny Baratynsky, Konstantin Batyushkov, Nikolay
Nekrasov, Aleksey Konstantinovich Tolstoy, Fyodor Tyutchev, and Afanasy
Fet followed in Pushkin's steps.

Prose was flourishing as well. The first great Russian novelist was
Nikolai Gogol. Then came Nikolai Leskov, Ivan Turgenev, Mikhail
Saltykov-Shchedrin, all mastering both short stories and novels, and
novelist Ivan Goncharov. Leo Tolstoy and Fyodor Dostoyevsky soon became
internationally renowned to the point that many scholars such as F. R.
Leavis have described one or the other as the greatest novelist ever. In
the second half of the century Anton Chekhov excelled in writing short
stories and became perhaps the leading dramatist internationally of his
period.

Other important 19th-century developments included the fabulist Ivan
Krylov; non-fiction writers such as Vissarion Belinsky and Alexander
Herzen; playwrights such as Aleksandr Griboyedov, Aleksandr Ostrovsky
and the satirist Kozma Prutkov (a collective pen name).

Nineteenth-century Russian literature perpetuated disparate ideas of
suicide; it became another facet of culture and society in which men and
women were regarded and treated differently. A woman could not commit
the noble, heroic suicide that a man could; she would not be regarded
highly or as a martyr, but as a simple human who, overcome with feelings
of love gone unfulfilled and having no one to protect her from being
victimized by society, surrendered herself. Many of the 19th-century
Russian heroines were victims of suicide as well as victims of the
lifestyle of St. Petersburg, which was long argued to have imported the
very idea of and justifications for suicide into Russia. St. Petersburg,
which was built as a Western rather than a Russian city was long accused
by supporters of traditional Russian lifestyles as importing Western
ideas—the ideas of achieving nobility, committing suicide and, the
synthesis of these two ideas, the nobility of suicide being among them.

Novels set in Moscow in particular, such as *Anna Karenina*, and
*Bednaia Liza* (Poor Liza), follow a trend of female suicides which
suggest a weakness in character which exists only because they are
women; they are said by readers to be driven by their emotions into
situations from which suicide seems to be the only escape. These
instances of self-murder have no deeper meaning than that and, in the
case of *Bednaia Liza,* the setting of Moscow serves only to provide a
familiarity which will draw the reader to it, and away from Western
novels.

Contrastingly, many novels set in St. Petersburg viewed suicide
primarily through the lens of a male protagonist (as in Fyodor
Dostoyevsky’s Crime and Punishment) as opposed to the females who held
the spotlight in the aforementioned titles. Beyond that, instead of the
few females who commit suicide in these Petersburg texts being propelled
to such lengths by a love so powerful and inescapable that it consumed
them, financial hardships and moral degradation which they faced in the
Imperial Capital contaminated or destroyed their femininity; related to
this, prostitution became markedly more prominent in popular literature
in the 19th century.

Another new aspect of literary suicides introduced in the Petersburg
texts is that authors have shifted their gazes from individuals and
their plot-driving actions to presentations of broad political
ideologies, which are common to Greek and Roman heroes—this step was
taken in order to establish a connection between Russian male
protagonists who take their own lives and Classic tragic heroes, whereas
the women of the literature remained as microcosms for the stereotyped
idea of the female condition. The idea of suicide as a mode of
protecting one’s right to self-sovereignty was seen as legitimate within
the sphere of St. Petersburg, a secular and “Godless…” capital. Unlike
Classic tragic heroes, the deaths of male protagonists, such as in
Nikolai Gogol’s *Nevskii Prospekt* and Dmitry Grigorovich’s
*Svistul’kin*, did not bring about great celebrations in their honor, or
even faint remembrances amongst their comrades. In fact, both
protagonists die lonely deaths, suffering quietly and alone in their
final hours. Until the Russian revolution in 1917, such themes remained
prominent in literature.

Image:Bryullov portrait of Zhukovsky.jpg|Vasily Zhukovsky
Image:Kiprensky Pushkin.jpg|Alexander Pushkin Image:Fyodor
Tyutchev.jpg|Fyodor Tyutchev Image:Портрет Гоголя.jpg|Nikolai Gogol
Image:Herzen ge detail.jpg|Alexander Herzen Image:Ivan
Goncharov(2).jpg|Ivan Goncharov Image:Bakunin.png|Mikhail Bakunin
Image:Mikhail lermontov.jpg|Mikhail Lermontov Image:Turgenev by
Repin.jpg|Ivan Turgenev Image:Fet by Repin.jpg|Afanasy Fet Image:Nikolay
Gay. Portrait of the Poet Nikolay Nekrasov.jpg|Nikolai Nekrasov
Image:Dostoevskij 1872.jpg|Fyodor Dostoyevsky Image:Wassilij
Grigorjewitsch Perow 003.jpg|Alexander Ostrovsky Image:Kramskoj -
saltykov-schedrin.jpg|Mikhail Saltykov-Schedrin Image:Ilya Efimovich
Repin (1844-1930) - Portrait of Leo Tolstoy (1887).jpg|Leo Tolstoy
Image:Serov Leskov.jpg|Nikolai Leskov Image:Peter Kropotkin circa
1900.jpg|Peter Kropotkin Image:Chekhov 1898 by Osip Braz.jpg|Anton
Chekhov

Silver Age
----------

The beginning of the 20th century ranks as the Silver Age of Russian
poetry. Well-known poets of the period include: Alexander Blok, Sergei
Yesenin, Valery Bryusov, Konstantin Balmont, Mikhail Kuzmin, Igor
Severyanin, Sasha Chorny, Nikolay Gumilyov, Maximilian Voloshin,
Innokenty Annensky, Zinaida Gippius. The poets most often associated
with the "Silver Age" are Anna Akhmatova, Marina Tsvetaeva, Osip
Mandelstam and Boris Pasternak.

While the Silver Age is considered to be the development of the
19th-century Russian literature tradition, some avant-garde poets tried
to overturn it: Velimir Khlebnikov, David Burliuk, Aleksei Kruchenykh
and Vladimir Mayakovsky.

Though the Silver Age is famous mostly for its poetry, it produced some
first-rate novelists and short-story writers, such as Aleksandr Kuprin,
Nobel Prize winner Ivan Bunin, Leonid Andreyev, Fedor Sologub, Aleksey
Remizov, Yevgeny Zamyatin, Dmitry Merezhkovsky and Andrei Bely, though
most of them wrote poetry as well as prose.

Image:Merezhkovsky.jpg|Dmitry Merezhkovsky Image:Maxim Gorky.jpg|Maxim
Gorky Image:Ivan Bunin 1933.jpg|Ivan Bunin Image:Андреев Леонид
1910е.JPG|Leonid Andreyev Image:Brusov1920.jpg|Valery Bryusov
Image:Бакст Леон. Андрей Белый.jpg|Andrey Bely Image:Blok.jpg|Alexander
Blok Image:Kustodiev Zamyatin.jpg|Yevgeny Zamyatin
Image:Petrov-vodkin-akhmatova.jpg|Anna Akhmatova Image:Osip Mandelstam
Russian writer.jpg|Osip Mandelstam Image:Mayakovsky 1929 a.jpg|Vladimir
Mayakovsky Image:Sergey Yesenin.jpg|Sergei Yesenin

20th century
------------

With the victory of Russia's Revolution, Mayakovsky worked on
interpreting the facts of the new reality. His works, such as "Ode to
the Revolution" and "Left March" (both 1918), brought innovations to
poetry. In "Left March", Mayakovsky calls for a struggle against the
enemies of the Russian Revolution. The poem "150,000,000" discusses the
leading played by the masses in the revolution. In the poem "Vladimir
Ilyich Lenin" (1924), Mayakovsky looks at the life and work at the
leader of Russia's revolution and depicts them against a broad
historical background. In the poem "It's Good", Mayakovsky writes about
socialist society being the "springtime of humanity". Mayakovsky was
instrumental in producing a new type of poetry in which politics played
a major part.

In the 1930s Socialist realism became the predominant trend in Russia.
Its leading figure was Maxim Gorky, who laid the foundations of this
style with his works *The Mother* and his play *The Enemies* (both
1906). His autobiographical trilogy describes his journey from the poor
of society to the development of his political consciousness. His novel
*The Artamanov Business* (1925) and his play *Egor Bulyshov* (1932)
depict the decay and inevitable downfall of Russia's ruling classes.
Gorky defined socialist realism as the "realism of people who are
rebuilding the world," and points out that it looks at the past "from
the heights of the future's goals". Gorky considered the main task of
writers to help in the development of the new man in socialist society.
Gorky's version of a heroic revolutionary is Pavel Vlasov from the novel
*The Mother*, who displays selflessness and compassion for the working
poor, as well as discipline and dedication. Gorky's works were
significant for the development of literature in Russia and became
influential in many parts of the world.

Nikolay Ostrovsky's novel *How the Steel Was Tempered* has been among
the most successful works of Russian literature, with tens of millions
of copies printed in many languages around the world. In China, various
versions of the book have sold more than 10 million copies. In Russia,
more than 35 million copies of the book are in circulation. The book is
a fictionalized autobiography of Ostrovsky's life, who had a difficult
working-class childhood and became a Komsomol member in July 1919 and
went to the front as a volunteer. The novel's protagonist, Pavel
Korchagin, represented the "young hero" of Russian literature: he is
dedicated to his political causes, which help him to overcome his
tragedies. The novel has served as an inspiration to youths around the
world and played a mobilizing role in Russia's Great Patriotic War.

Alexander Fadeyev achieved noteworthy success in Russia, with tens of
millions of copies of his books in circulation in Russia and around the
world. Many of Fadeyev's works have been staged and filmed and
translated into many languages in Russia and around the world. Fadeyev
served as a secretary of the Soviet Writers' Union and was the general
secretary of the union's administrative board from 1946 to 1954. He was
awarded two Orders of Lenin and various medals. His novel *The Rout*
deals with the partisan struggle in Russia's Far East during the Russian
Revolution and Civil War. Fadeyev described the theme of this novel as
one of a revolution significantly transforming the masses. The novel's
protagonist Levinson is a Bolshevik revolutionary who has a high level
of political consciousness. The novel *The Young Guard*, which received
the State Prize of the USSR in 1946, focuses on an underground Komsomol
group in Krasnodon, Ukraine and their struggle against the fascist
occupation.

The first years of the Soviet regime were marked by the proliferation of
avant-garde literature groups. One of the most important was the Oberiu
movement that included the most famous Russian absurdist Daniil Kharms,
Konstantin Vaginov, Alexander Vvedensky, and Nikolay Zabolotsky. Other
famous authors experimenting with language were novelists Yuri Olesha
and Andrei Platonov and short story writers Isaak Babel and Mikhail
Zoshchenko. The OPOJAZ group of literary critics, also known as Russian
formalism, was created in close connection with Russian Futurism. Two of
its members also produced influential literary works, namely Viktor
Shklovsky, whose numerous books (e.g., *Zoo, or Letters Not About Love*,
1923) defy genre in that they present a novel mix of narration,
autobiography, and aesthetic as well as social commentary, and Yury
Tynyanov, who used his knowledge of Russia's literary history to produce
a set of historical novels mainly set in the Pushkin era (e.g., *Young
Pushkin: A Novel*).

Writers like those of the Serapion Brothers group, who insisted on the
right of an author to write independently of political ideology, were
forced by authorities to reject their views and accept socialist realist
principles. Some 1930s writers, such as Mikhail Bulgakov, author of *The
Master and Margarita*, and Nobel-prize winning Boris Pasternak with his
novel *Doctor Zhivago* continued the classical tradition of Russian
literature with little or no hope of being published. Their major works
would not be published until the Khrushchev Thaw, and Pasternak was
forced to refuse his Nobel prize.

Meanwhile, *émigré* writers, such as poets Vladislav Khodasevich, Georgy
Ivanov, and Vyacheslav Ivanov; novelists such as Mark Aldanov, Gaito
Gazdanov, and Vladimir Nabokov; and short story Nobel Prize winning
writer Ivan Bunin, continued to write in exile.

The Khrushchev Thaw brought some fresh wind to literature. Poetry became
a mass cultural phenomenon: Bella Akhmadulina, Robert Rozhdestvensky,
Andrei Voznesensky, and Yevgeny Yevtushenko, read their poems in
stadiums and attracted huge crowds.

Some writers dared to oppose Soviet ideology, like short story writer
Varlam Shalamov and Nobel Prize-winning novelist Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn,
who wrote about life in the gulag camps, or Vasily Grossman, with his
description of World War II events countering the Soviet official
historiography. They were dubbed "dissidents" and could not publish
their major works until the 1960s.

But the thaw did not last long. In the 1970s, some of the most prominent
authors were not only banned from publishing but were also prosecuted
for their anti-Soviet sentiments, or parasitism. Solzhenitsyn was
expelled from the country. Others, such as Nobel prize-winning poet
Joseph Brodsky; novelists Vasily Aksyonov, Eduard Limonov, Sasha Sokolov
and Vladimir Voinovich; and short story writer Sergei Dovlatov, had to
emigrate to the West, while Oleg Grigoriev and Venedikt Yerofeyev
"emigrated" to alcoholism. Their books were not published officially
until perestroika, although fans continued to reprint them manually in a
manner called "samizdat" (self-publishing).

Image:ANTolstoy.jpg|Aleksey Tolstoy Image:Boris Pasternak
cropped.jpg|Boris Pasternak Image:Bulgakov1910s.jpg|Mikhail Bulgakov
Image:Tsvetaeva.jpg|Marina Tsvetaeva

Image:Ilf Petrov.jpg|Ilya Ilf and Yevgeny Petrov
Image:Sholokhov-1938.jpg|Mikhail Sholokhov Image:Daniil
Kharms.jpg|Daniil Kharms <File:Alex> Belayev.jpg|Alexander Belayev
<File:Aleksandr> Solzhenitsyn 1974crop.jpg|Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
Image:Josef Brodsky crop.jpg|Joseph Brodsky

### Popular genres

Children's literature in Soviet Union was considered a major genre,
because of its educational role. A large share of early period
children's books were poems: Korney Chukovsky, Samuil Marshak, Agnia
Barto were among the most read. "Adult" poets, such as Mayakovsky and
Sergey Mikhalkov, contributed to the genre as well. Some of the early
Soviet children's prose was loose adaptations of foreign fairy tales
unknown in contemporary Russia. Alexey N. Tolstoy wrote *Buratino*, a
light-hearted and shortened adaptation of Carlo Collodi's *Pinocchio*.
Alexander Volkov introduced fantasy fiction to Soviet children with his
loose translation of Frank L. Baum's *The Wonderful Wizard of Oz*,
published as *The Wizard of the Emerald City*, and then wrote a series
of five sequels, unrelated to Baum. Other notable authors include
Nikolay Nosov, Lazar Lagin, Vitaly Bianki.

While fairy tales were relatively free from ideological oppression, the
realistic children's prose of the Stalin era was highly ideological and
pursued the goal to raise children as patriots and communists. A notable
example is Arkady Gaydar, himself a Red Army commander (colonel) in
Russian Civil War: his stories and plays about Timur describe a team of
young pioneer volunteers who help the elderly and resist hooligans.
There was a genre of hero pioneer story, that bore some similarities
with Christian genre of hagiography. In Khrushov and Brezhnev times,
however, the pressure lightened. Mid- and late Soviet children's books
by Eduard Uspensky, Yuri Entin, Viktor Dragunsky bear no signs of
propaganda. In the 1970s many of these books, as well as stories by
foreign children's writers, were adapted into animation.

Soviet Science fiction, inspired by scientistic revolution,
industrialisation, and the country's space pioneering, was flourishing,
albeit in the limits allowed by censors. Early science fiction authors,
such as Alexander Belyayev, Grigory Adamov, Vladimir Obruchev, Aleksey
Nikolayevich Tolstoy, stack to hard science fiction and regarded H. G.
Wells and Jules Verne as examples to follow. Two notable exclusions from
this trend were Yevgeny Zamyatin, author of dystopian novel *We*, and
Mikhail Bulgakov, who, while using science fiction instrumentary in
*Heart of a Dog*, *The Fatal Eggs* and *Ivan Vasilyevich: Back to the
Future|Ivan Vasilyevich*, was interested in social satire rather than
scientistic progress. The two have had problems with publishing their
books in Soviet Union.

Since the thaw in the 1950s Soviet science fiction began to form its own
style. Philosophy, ethics, utopian and dystopian ideas became its core,
and Social science fiction was the most popular subgenre. Although the
view of Earth's future as that of utopian communist society was the only
welcome, the liberties of genre still offered a loophole for free
expression. Books of brothers Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, and Kir
Bulychev, among others, are reminiscent of social problems and often
include satire on contemporary Soviet society. Ivan Yefremov, on the
contrary, arose to fame with his utopian views on future as well as on
Ancient Greece in his historical novels. Strugatskies are also credited
for the Soviet's first science fantasy, the Monday Begins on Saturday
trilogy. Other notable science fiction writers included Vladimir
Savchenko, Georgy Gurevich, Alexander Kazantsev, Georgy Martynov,
Yeremey Parnov. Space opera was less developed, since both state censors
and serious writers watched it unfavorably. Nevertheless, there were
moderately successful attempts to adapt space westerns to Soviet soil.
The first was Alexander Kolpakov with "Griada", after came Sergey Snegov
with "Men Like Gods", among others.

A specific branch of both science fiction and children's books appeared
in mid-Soviet era: the children's science fiction. It was meant to
educate children while entertaining them. The star of the genre was
Bulychov, who, along with his adult books, created children's space
adventure series about Alisa Selezneva, a teenage girl from the future.
Others include Nikolay Nosov with his books about dwarf Neznayka, Evgeny
Veltistov, who wrote about robot boy Electronic, Vitaly Melentyev,
Vladislav Krapivin, Vitaly Gubarev.

Mystery was another popular genre. Detectives by brothers Arkady and
Georgy Vayner and spy novels by Yulian Semyonov were best-selling, and
many of them were adapted into film or TV in 1970s and 1980s.

Village prose is a genre that conveys nostalgic descriptions of rural
life. Valentin Rasputin’s 1976 novel, *Proshchaniye s Matyoroy*
(*Farewell to Matyora*) depicted a village faced with destruction to
make room for a hydroelectric plant.

Historical fiction in the early Soviet era included a large share of
memoirs, fictionalized or not. Valentin Katayev and Lev Kassil wrote
semi-autobiographic books about children's life in Tsarist Russia.
Vladimir Gilyarovsky wrote *Moscow and Muscovites*, about life in
pre-revolutionary Moscow. The late Soviet historical fiction was
dominated by World War II novels and short stories by authors such as
Boris Vasilyev, Viktor Astafyev, Boris Polevoy, Vasil Bykaŭ, among many
others, based on the authors' own war experience. Vasily Yan and
Konstantin Badygin are best known for their novels on Medieval Rus, and
Yury Tynyanov for writing on Russian Empire. Valentin Pikul wrote about
many different epochs and countries in an Alexander Dumas-inspired
style. In the 1970s there appeared a relatively independent Village
Prose, whose most prominent representatives were Viktor Astafyev and
Valentin Rasputin.

Any sort of fiction that dealt with the occult, either horror,
adult-oriented fantasy or magic realism, was unwelcome in Soviet Russia.
Until 1980's very few books in these genres were written, and even fewer
were published, although earlier books, such as by Gogol, were not
banned. Of the rare exceptions, Bulgakov in *Master and Margarita* (not
published in author's lifetime) and Strugatskies in *Monday Begins on
Saturday* introduced magic and mystical creatures into contemporary
Soviet reality to satirize it. Another exception was early Soviet writer
Alexander Grin, who wrote romantic tales, both realistic and fantastic.

Post-Soviet era
---------------

The end of the 20th century proved a difficult period for Russian
literature, with relatively few distinct voices. Although the censorship
was lifted and writers could now freely express their thoughts, the
political and economic chaos of the 1990s affected the book market and
literature heavily. The book printing industry descended into crisis,
the number of printed book copies dropped several times in comparison to
Soviet era, and it took about a decade to revive.

Among the most discussed authors of this period were Victor Pelevin, who
gained popularity with first short stories and then novels, novelist and
playwright Vladimir Sorokin, and the poet Dmitry Prigov. A relatively
new trend in Russian literature is that female short story writers
Tatyana Tolstaya or Lyudmila Petrushevskaya, and novelists Lyudmila
Ulitskaya or Dina Rubina have come into prominence. The tradition of the
classic Russian novel continues with such authors as Mikhail Shishkin
and Vasily Aksyonov.

Detective stories and thrillers have proven a very successful genre of
new Russian literature: in the 1990s serial detective novels by
Alexandra Marinina, Polina Dashkova and Darya Dontsova were published in
millions of copies. In the next decade a more highbrow author Boris
Akunin with his series about the 19th century sleuth Erast Fandorin
became widely popular.

Science fiction is still among best-selling, albeit second to fantasy,
that was relatively new to Russian readers. These genres boomed in late
1990s, with authors like Sergey Lukyanenko, Nick Perumov, Maria
Semenova, Vera Kamsha, Alexey Pekhov and Vadim Panov. A good share of
modern Russian science fiction and fantasy is written in Ukraine,
especially in Kharkiv, home to H. L. Oldie, Alexander Zorich, Yuri
Nikitin and Andrey Valentinov. Many others hail from Kiev, including
Marina and Sergey Dyachenko and Vladimir Arenev. Significant
contribution to Russian horror literature has been done by Ukrainians
Andrey Dashkov and Alexander Vargo.

The leading poets of the young generation are arguably Dmitry Vodennikov
and Andrey Rodionov, both famous not only for their verses, but also for
their ability to artistically recite them. In the late 2000s (decade) a
new generation of young poets came, who prefer the classic style of
writing, which inherits the traditions of the Silver Age: Maria Markova
(owner of the Russian presidential award), Andrey Nitchenko (winner of
many authoritative literary contests) and many others.

Trent Johnson was a leading critic of Russian literature during this
time.

Image:Lyudmila Ulitskaya 4.jpg|Lyudmila Ulitskaya Image:Eduard
Limonov.jpg|Eduard Limonov Image:Vladimir sorokin
20060313-2.jpg|Vladimir Sorokin Image:Boris Akunin 2012.jpg|Boris Akunin
Image:Pelevin.jpg|Victor Pelevin Image:Sergey Lukyanenko MOW
03-2011.jpg|Sergei Lukyanenko

### 21st century

In the 21st century, a new generation of Russian authors appeared
differing greatly from the postmodernist Russian prose of the late 20th
century, which lead critics to speak about “new realism”. Having grown
up after the fall of the Soviet Union, the "new realists" write about
every day life, but without using the mystical and surrealist elements
of their predecessors.

The "new realists" are writers who assume there is a place for preaching
in journalism, social and political writing and the media, but that
“direct action” is the responsibility of civil society.

Leading "new realists" include Ilja Stogoff, Zakhar Prilepin, Alexander
Karasyov, Arkadi Babchenko, Vladimir Lorchenkov, Alexander Snegiryov and
the political author Sergej Shargunov.

Image:MichaelShishkin1209n.jpg|Mikhail Shishkin Image:Zakhar Prilepin at
Nizhny Novgorod rally, 4 February 2012.jpg|Zakhar Prilepin Image:Dmitry
Glukhovsky MOW 03-2011.jpg|Dmitry Glukhovsky

External influences
-------------------

### British romantic poetry

Scottish poet Robert Burns became a ‘people’s poet’ in Russia. In
Imperial times the Russian aristocracy were so out of touch with the
peasantry that Burns, translated into Russian, became a symbol for the
ordinary Russian people. In Soviet Russia Burns was elevated as the
archetypical poet of the people – not least since the Soviet regime
slaughtered and silenced its own poets. A new translation of Burns,
begun in 1924 by Samuil Marshak, proved enormously popular selling over
600,000 copies. In 1956, the Soviet Union became the first country in
the world to honour Burns with a commemorative stamp. The poetry of
Burns is taught in Russian schools alongside their own national poets.
Burns was a great admirer of the egalitarian ethos behind the French
Revolution. Whether Burns would have recognised the same principles at
work in the Soviet State at its most repressive is moot. This didn’t
stop the Communists from claiming Burns as one of their own and
incorporating his work into their state propaganda. The post communist
years of rampant capitalism in Russia have not tarnished Burns'
reputation.

Lord Byron was a major influence on almost all Russian poets of the
Golden Era, including Pushkin, Vyazemsky, Zhukovsky, Batyushkov,
Baratynsky, Delvig and, especially, Lermontov.

### French Literature

Writers such as Victor Hugo and Honoré de Balzac were widely
influential. Also, Jules Verne inspired several generations of Russian
science fiction writers.

Abroad
------

Russian literature is not only written by Russians. In the Soviet times
such popular writers as Belarusian Vasil Bykaŭ, Kyrgyz Chinghiz Aitmatov
and Abkhaz Fazil Iskander wrote some of their books in Russian. Some
renowned contemporary authors writing in Russian have been born and live
in Ukraine (Andrey Kurkov, H. L. Oldie, Marina and Sergey Dyachenko) or
Baltic States (Garros and Evdokimov, Max Frei). Most Ukrainian fantasy
and science fiction authors write in Russian, which gives them access to
a much broader audience, and usually publish their books via Russian
publishers such as Eksmo, Azbuka and AST.

A number of prominent Russian authors such as novelists Mikhail
Shishkin, Rubén Gallego, Svetlana Martynchik and Dina Rubina, poets
Alexei Tsvetkov and Bakhyt Kenjeev, though born in USSR, live and work
in West Europe, North America or Israel.

Themes in Russian books
-----------------------

Suffering, often as a means of redemption, is a recurrent theme in
Russian literature. Fyodor Dostoyevsky in particular is noted for
exploring suffering in works such as *Notes from Underground* and *Crime
and Punishment*. Christianity and Christian symbolism are also important
themes, notably in the works of Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy and Chekhov. In the
20th century, suffering as a mechanism of evil was explored by authors
such as Solzhenitsyn in *The Gulag Archipelago*. A leading Russian
literary critic of the 20th century Viktor Shklovsky, in his book, *Zoo,
or Letters Not About Love*, wrote, "Russian literature has a bad
tradition. Russian literature is devoted to the description of
unsuccessful love affairs."

Russian Nobel Prize in Literature winners
-----------------------------------------

-   Ivan Bunin
-   Boris Pasternak
-   Mikhail Sholokhov
-   Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
-   Joseph Brodsky

