There are a number of martial arts styles and schools of Russian origin.

Traditional Russian fist fighting has existed since the 1st millennium
A.D. It was outlawed in the Russian Empire in 1832, however it has seen
a resurgence after the break-up of the Soviet Union.

During the Soviet era the government wanted to create both military
hand-to-hand combat systems and combat sports. The new styles included
Systema, Retuinskih's System ROSS and Sambo.

During the 1980s and after the fall of Communism the interest in the
folk martial arts was reawakened. Through ethnographic study, many new
styles based on the folk styles appeared. The two most famous new styles
of that era are Russian All-Round Fighting, which is based on the styles
of old Cossack saber fencing and on Soviet era styles, and Buza which is
based on the old local village fights and dances.

Types
-----

### Fist fighting

**Russian fist fighting** (Russian - Кулачный бой *Kulachniy boy* "fist
fighting, pugilism) is the traditional bare-knuckle boxing of Russia.
The earliest accounts concerning the sport date to the 13th century.

### Sambo

**Sambo** (; ) is a Russian martial art and combat sport. The word
"SAMBO" is an acronym for ***SAM**ozashchita **B**ez **O**ruzhiya*,
which literally translates as "self-defense without weapons". Sambo is
relatively modern since its development began in the early 1920s by the
Soviet Red Army to improve their hand-to-hand combat abilities. Intended
to be a merger of the most effective techniques of other martial arts,
Sambo has roots in Japanese Judo, international styles of wrestling,
plus traditional folk styles of wrestling such as: Armenian Kokh,
Georgian Chidaoba, Romanian Trîntǎ, Tatar Köräş, Uzbek Kurash, Mongolian
Khapsagay and Azerbaijani Gulesh.

The pioneers of Sambo were Viktor Spiridonov and Vasili Oshchepkov.
Oshchepkov died in prison as a result of the political purges of 1937
after accusations of being a Japanese spy. Oshchepkov spent much of his
life living in Japan and training in judo under its founder Kano Jigoro.
The two Russians independently developed two different styles which
eventually cross-pollinated and became what is known as Sambo. Compared
to Oshchepkov's judo-based system, then called "Freestyle Wrestling,"
Spiridonov's style was softer and less strength dependent. This was in
large part due to Spiridonov's injuries sustained during World War I.

Anatoly Kharlampiev, a student of Vasili Oshchepkov, is often considered
the founder of Sport Sambo. In 1938, it was recognized as an official
sport by the USSR All-Union Sports Committee.

References
----------

Category:Russian culture Category:Russian martial arts|\*
Category:History of Russia
