Image:St Basils Cathedral-500px.jpg|thumb|180px|Saint Basil's Cathedral
(1555–61) is a showcase of Renaissance Russian architecture.|alt=Saint
Basil's Cathedral, with multicolored onion-shaped domes against a blue
sky

**Russian architecture** follows a tradition whose roots were
established in the Eastern Slavic state of Kievan Rus'. After the fall
of Kiev, Russian architectural history continued in the principalities
of Vladimir-Suzdal, Novgorod, the succeeding states of the Tsardom of
Russia, the Russian Empire, the Soviet Union, and the modern Russian
Federation.

Kievan Rus' (988–1230)
----------------------

The medieval state of Kievan Rus' was the predecessor of Russia, Belarus
and Ukraine and their respective cultures (including architecture). The
great churches of Kievan Rus', built after the adoption of Christianity
in 988, were the first examples of monumental architecture in the East
Slavic region. The architectural style of the Kievan state, which
quickly established itself, was strongly influenced by Byzantine
architecture. Early Eastern Orthodox churches were mainly built from
wood, with their simplest form known as a cell church. Major cathedrals
often featured many small domes, which has led some art historians to
infer how the pagan Slavic temples may have appeared.

Saint Sophia Cathedral in Novgorod (1044–52), on the other hand,
expressed a new style which exerted a strong influence on Russian church
architecture. Its austere thick walls, small, narrow windows, and
helmeted cupolas have much in common with the Romanesque architecture of
Western Europe. Further departures from the Byzantine model are evident
in succeeding Novgorod cathedrals: St Nicholas' (1113), St Anthony's
(1117–19), and St George's (1119). The secular architecture of Kievan
Rus' has barely survived. Until the 20th century only the Golden Gates
of Vladimir, despite much 18th-century restoration, could be regarded as
an authentic monument of the pre-Mongol period. During the 1940s,
archaeologist Nikolai Voronin discovered the well-preserved remains of
Andrei Bogolyubsky's palace in Bogolyubovo (dating from 1158 to 1165).

The city of Novgorod preserved its architecture during the Mongol
invasion. The first churches were commissioned by the princes; however,
after the 13th century merchants, guilds and communities began to
commission cathedrals. The citizens of 13th-century Novgorod were noted
for their shrewdness, diligence and prosperity, expanding from the
Baltic to the White Sea. The architecture in Novgorod did not begin to
flourish until the turn of the 12th century. The Novgorod Sophia
cathedral was modeled after the original Saint Sophia Cathedral in Kiev;
it is similar in appearance but smaller, narrower and (in a development
of North Russian architecture) onion-shaped domes replace cupolas.
Construction was supervised by workmen from Kiev, who also imported
bricks. The primary building materials were fieldstone and undressed
limestone blocks. It is said that the interiors were painted in
frescoes, which have now vanished. The doors were made of bronze.

The katholikon of Yuriev Monastery was commissioned in 1119 by Prince
Vsevolod Mstislavovich. The architect was known as Master Peter, one of
the few architects who have been recorded at this time in Russia. The
exterior is characterized by narrow windows and double-recessed niches,
which proceed in a rhythm across the façade; the interior walls reach a
height of . Its pillars are closely spaced, emphasizing the height of
the vaulted ceilings. The interior was covered in frescoes from the
prince’s workshops, including some of the rarest Russian paintings of
the time.

The Church of the Transfiguration of the Savior was a memorial to Ilya
Muromets. During the Mongol invasion, Ilya was reputed to have saved the
city; the church was built in his honor on Elijah Street in 1374. During
this time the city-state of Novgorod established a separate district for
the princes, subdividing the city into a series of streets where the
church still stands. The church windows are more detailed, the niches
deeper and the dome (seen in larger cathedrals) is augmented by a
pitched roof.

Another church closely resembling the Church of the Transfiguration is
the Church of Saints Peter and Paul in Kozhevniki. It was constructed in
1406, and the primary difference is in building material. The detail is
focused on the west and south facades. New ornamental motifs in the
brick appear at this time. Brick was also used for the pilasters which
delineate the façade. It was originally plastered, but underwent
restoration after it was damaged during World War II. Its apse points
towards the river, which provides a welcome sight for ships approaching
from the Baltic. The shingled roof resembles the bochka roofs popular at
the time. The walls were built from local quarrystone, which contrasted
with the red bricks. The ground plan of the church is almost square with
four pillars, one apse and one dome.

<center>
<File:Cathedral> of St. Sophia, the Holy Wisdom of God in Novgorod,
Russia.jpg|Saint Sophia Cathedral in Novgorod (1045—1050)
[File:Георгиевский](File:Георгиевский) собор.jpg|St.George's Cathedral
of Yuriev Monastery (1119) <File:Golden> Gate Vladimir.jpg|Golden Gate
in Vladimir (1158–1164) <File:Church> of the Protection of the Theotokos
on the Nerl 10.jpg|Church of the Intercession on the Nerl (1165)
[File:Владимир](File:Владимир) Успенский собор 2008.JPG|Dormition
Cathedral in Vladimir (1186—1189)

</center>
Early Muscovite period (1230–1530)
----------------------------------

The Mongols looted the country so thoroughly that even capitals (such as
Moscow or Tver) could not afford new stone churches for more than half a
century. Novgorod and Pskov escaped the Mongol yoke, however, and
evolved into successful commercial republics; dozens of medieval
churches (from the 12th century and after) have been preserved in these
towns. The churches of Novgorod (such as the Saviour-on-Ilyina-Street,
built in 1374), are steep-roofed and roughly carved; some contain
magnificent medieval frescoes. The tiny and picturesque churches of
Pskov feature many novel elements: corbel arches, church porches,
exterior galleries and bell towers. All these features were introduced
by Pskov masons to Muscovy, where they constructed numerous buildings
during the 15th century (including the Deposition Church of the Moscow
Kremlin (1462) and the Holy Spirit Church of the Holy Trinity Lavra,
built in 1476).

The 14th-century churches of Muscovy are few, and their ages are
disputed. Typical monuments—found in Nikolskoe (near Ruza, possibly from
the 1320s) and Kolomna (possibly from the second decade of the 14th
century)—are diminutive single-domed fortified churches, built of
roughly hewn ("wild") stone and capable of withstanding brief sieges. By
the construction of the Assumption Cathedral in Zvenigorod (possibly in
1399), Muscovite masons regained the mastery of pre-Mongol builders and
solved some of the construction problems which had puzzled their
predecessors. Signature monuments of early Muscovite architecture are
found in the Holy Trinity Lavra (1423), Savvin Monastery of Zvenigorod
(possibly 1405) and St. Andronik Monastery in Moscow (1427).

By the end of the 15th century Muscovy was so powerful a state that its
prestige required magnificent, multi-domed buildings on a par with the
pre-Mongol cathedrals of Novgorod and Vladimir. As Russian masters were
unable to build anything like them, Ivan III invited Italian masters
from Florence and Venice. They reproduced ancient Vladimir structures in
three large cathedrals in the Moscow Kremlin, and decorated them with
Italian Renaissance motifs. These ambitious Kremlin cathedrals (among
them the Dormition and Archangel Cathedrals) were imitated throughout
Russia during the 16th century, with new edifices tending to be larger
and more ornate than their predecessors (for example, the Hodegetria
Cathedral of Novodevichy Convent from the 1520s).

Apart from churches, many other structures date from Ivan III's reign.
These include fortifications (Kitai-gorod, the Kremlin (its current
towers were built later), Ivangorod), towers (Ivan the Great Bell Tower)
and palaces (the Palace of Facets and the Uglich Palace). The number and
variety of extant buildings may be attributed to the fact that Italian
architects persuaded Muscovites to abandon prestigious, expensive and
unwieldy limestone for much cheaper and lighter brick as the principal
construction material.

<center>
<File:Ilyina> Transfiguration church, Novgorod.JPG|Church of the
Transfiguration on Ilin Street in Veliky Novgorod (1374)
[File:EpiscopalPalace(Suzdal)2.JPG|Episcopal](File:EpiscopalPalace(Suzdal)2.JPG|Episcopal)
palace in Suzdal (15th century) <File:Dormition> (Kremlin).JPG|The
Cathedral of the Dormition (1475–1479), Moscow
[File:Палаты](File:Палаты) царевича Димитрия (Углич).jpg|Tsarevich
Dmitry palace in Uglich (1482) <File:Granovitaya> palata 01.JPG|Palace
of Facets in Moscow Kremlin (1487–1492) <File:0> 4707b 6549aa91
spasskaya.jpg|Spasskaya Tower in Moscow Kremlin (1491) <File:Moscow>,
English Court (3).jpg|Old English Court - headquarters of English
Muscovy Company (ca. 1490-1510) <File:Clocher> d'Ivan le Grand.jpg|Ivan
The Great Bell Tower (1505–1508)

</center>
Middle Muscovite period (1530–1630)
-----------------------------------

In the 16th century, the key development was the introduction of the
tented roof in brick architecture. Tent-like roof construction is
thought to have originated in northern Russia, since it prevented snow
from piling up on wooden buildings during long winters. In wooden
churches (even modern ones), this type of roof has been very popular.
The first tent-like brick church is the Ascension church in Kolomenskoe
(1531), designed to commemorate the birth of Ivan the Terrible. Its
design gives rise to speculation; it is likely that this style (never
found in other Orthodox countries) symbolized the ambition of the
nascent Russian state and the liberation of Russian art from Byzantine
canons after Constantinople's fall to the Turks.

Tented churches were popular during the reign of Ivan the Terrible. Two
prime examples dating from his reign employ several tents of exotic
shapes and colors, arranged in an intricate design: the Church of St
John the Baptist in Kolomenskoye (1547) and Saint Basil's Cathedral on
Red Square (1561). The latter church unites nine tented roofs in a
striking circular composition.

<center>
<File:Kolomenskoe> Ascension Church and the bell tower of the George
Church.jpg|Church of the Ascension in Kolomenskoe (1532) <File:Moscow> -
Entrance of Red Square.jpg|Iberian Gate and Chapel in Moscow (1535)
<File:Romanov> boyar residence.JPG|17th-century Romanov boyar residence
<File:Sobor> Novodev.jpg|Smolensk Cathedral of Novodevichy convent
(1560s) [File:Moscou-Kremlin-Теремной](File:Moscou-Kremlin-Теремной)
дворец.jpg|Terem Palace (1560s/1635-36)

</center>
Late Muscovite period (1630–1712)
---------------------------------

After the Time of Troubles the church and state were bankrupt, unable to
finance any construction works; an initiative was taken by rich
merchants in Yaroslavl, on the Volga. During the 17th century, they
built many large cathedral-type churches with five onion-like cupolas,
surrounding them with tents of bell towers and aisles. At first the
churches' composition was sharply asymmetrical, with different parts
balancing each other on the "scale-beam" principle (e.g., the Church of
Elijah the Prophet, 1647–50). Subsequently the Yaroslavl churches were
strictly symmetrical, with cupolas taller than the building itself, and
amply decorated with polychrome tiles (e.g., the Church of John the
Chrysostom on the Volga, 1649–54). A zenith of Volga architecture was
reached in the Church of St John the Baptist (built 1671-87)—the largest
in Yaroslavl, with 15 cupolas and more than 500 frescoes. The brick
exterior of the church, from the cupolas down to the tall porches, was
elaborately carved and decorated with tiles.

The 17th-century Moscow churches are also profusely decorated, but they
are much smaller in size. Earlier in the century, the Muscovites still
favoured tent-like constructions. The chief object of their admiration
was the "Miraculous" Assumption Church in Uglich (1627): it had three
graceful tents in a row, reminiscent of three burning candles. This
composition was extravagantly employed in the Hodegetria Church of
Vyazma (1638) and the Nativity Church at Putinki, Moscow (1652).
Assuming that such constructions ran counter to the traditional
Byzantine type, the Patriarch Nikon declared them un-canonical. He
encouraged building elaborate ecclesiastical residences (such as the
Rostov Kremlin on the Nero Lake which featured five tall churches, many
towers, palaces, and chambers). Nikon designed his new residence at the
New Jerusalem Monastery which was dominated by a rotunda-like cathedral,
the first of its type in Russia.

Since the tents were banned, the Muscovite architects had to replace
them with successive rows of corbel arches (kokoshniki), and this
decorative element was to become a hallmark of 17th-century Moscow
flamboyant style. An early example of the flamboyant style is the Kazan
Cathedral on Red Square (1633–36). By the end of the century, more than
100 churches in the fiery style were erected in Moscow, and perhaps as
many again in the neighbouring region. Among the more splendid examples
are the Moscow churches of the Holy Trinity at Nikitniki (1653), St
Nicholas at Khamovniki (1682), and Holy Trinity at Ostankino (1692).
Probably the most representative flamboyant-style structure was the
Church of St Nicholas (the "Grand Cross") in the Kitai-gorod, brutally
destroyed at Stalin's behest.

As Russian architecture degenerated into the purely decorative, it was
also influenced by the Polish and Ukrainian Baroque. The first baroque
churches were small chapels built on the Naryshkin family estates near
Moscow, so the name of Naryshkin baroque is often applied to this style.
Some of these churches are tower-like, with cubic and octagonal floors
placed atop each other (the Saviour Church at Ubory, 1697); others have
a ladder-like composition, with a bell tower rising above the church
itself (the Intercession Church at Fili, 1695). The Baroque and
flamboyant-style decoration is often so profuse that the church seems to
be the work of a jeweller rather than a mason (e.g., the Trinity Church
at Lykovo, 1696). Perhaps the most delightful example of the Naryshkin
baroque was the multi-domed Assumption Church on the Pokrovka Street in
Moscow (built 1696-99, demolished 1929). Its architect was also
responsible for the "red and white" reconstruction of several Moscow
monastic structures, notably the Novodevichy Convent and the Donskoy
Monastery.

The Baroque style quickly spread throughout Russia, gradually replacing
more traditional and canonical architecture. The Stroganov merchants
sponsored construction of majestic Baroque structures in Nizhny Novgorod
(the Nativity Church, 1703) and in the remote tundra region (the
Presentation Cathedral in Solvychegodsk, 1693). During the first decades
of the 18th century, some remarkable Baroque cathedrals were built in
such eastern towns as Kazan, Solikamsk, Verkhoturye, Tobolsk and
Irkutsk. Also interesting are the traditional wooden churches by
carpenters of the Russian North. Working without hammer and nails, they
constructed such bizarre structures as the 24-domed Intercession Church
at Vytegra (1708, burnt down 1963) and the 22-domed Transfiguration
Church at Kizhi (1714).

<center>
<File:Moscou> Kremlin Потешный Дворец.jpg|Amusement Palace (pink) in
Moscow Kremlin (1652) <File:Zvenigorod> palace.jpg|Palace of Alexis I in
Savvino-Storozhevsky Monastery (1652–54)
[File:Kreml-12apostel.jpg|Palace](File:Kreml-12apostel.jpg|Palace) of
the Patriarch of Moscow, with the Church of the Twelve Apostles (1653)
<File:New> Jerusalem 6.JPG|Сathedral of the Resurrection, New Jerusalem
Monastery (1656—1685) <File:Kolomenskoe> Wooden Palace
(Morning).jpg|Kolomenskoye, summer residence of the Tsars (1667–1668)
<File:Pogankini> palati.jpg|Palace of the wealthy merchant family
Pogankin in Pskov (1671—1679) <File:Yar> mitro.jpg|Metropolitan Palace
in Yaroslavl (1680th-1690th) <File:Dubrovitsy> church of
Sign.JPG|Znamenskaya Church (1690–1704) <File:Moscow>, Krutitsy
Teremok.jpg|Krutitsy (1693–94) <File:Nizhny> Novgorod Pushnikov's
Chamber.JPG|Pushkikov's palace in Nizhny Novgorod (1698)
<File:Menshikov> tower (1).jpg|Menshikov tower (1707) <File:Kizhi>
churches.jpg|Kizhi (1711–1714)

</center>
Imperial Russia (1712–1917)
---------------------------

In 1712, Peter I of Russia moved the capital from Moscow to St
Petersburg, which he planned to design in the Dutch style usually called
Petrine baroque. Its major monuments include the Peter and Paul
Cathedral and Menshikov Palace. During the reign of Empress Anna and
Elizaveta Petrovna, Russian architecture was dominated by the luxurious
baroque style of Bartolomeo Rastrelli; Rastrelli's signature buildings
include the Winter Palace, the Catherine Palace and the Smolny
Cathedral. Other distinctive monuments of the Elizabethan Baroque are
the bell tower of the Troitse-Sergiyeva Lavra and the Red Gate.

Catherine the Great dismissed Rastrelli and patronized neoclassical
architects invited from Scotland and Italy. Some representative
buildings from her reign are the Alexander Palace (by Giacomo Quarenghi)
and the Trinity Cathedral of the Alexander Nevsky Lavra (by Ivan
Starov). During Catherine's reign, the Russian Gothic Revival style was
developed by Vasily Bazhenov and Matvei Kazakov in Moscow. Alexander I
of Russia favoured the Empire style, which became *de facto* the only
style of his period, evidenced by the Kazan Cathedral, the Admiralty
building, the Bolshoi Theatre, St Isaac's Cathedral, and the Narva
Triumphal Gates in Saint Petersburg. The Empire style's influence was
even greater in Moscow, which had to rebuild thousands of houses
destroyed by the fire of 1812.

In the 1830s Nicholas I eased regulation in architecture, opening the
trade to several incarnations of early eclecticism. Konstantin Ton's
pseudo-Russian designs became the preferred choice in church
construction (Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, 1832–1883), while his
public buildings followed Renaissance tradition, exemplified in the
Great Kremlin Palace (1838–49) and the Kremlin Armoury (1844–1851). The
subsequent reigns of Alexander II and Alexander III promoted a Russian
Byzantine revival in church architecture, while civil construction
followed the same variety of eclectisicm common in all European
countries; this featured ever-growing national revival trends,
vernacular and imaginary (Pogodin's Hut and the State Historical Museum
in Moscow, for example).

Between 1895 and 1905 architecture was briefly dominated by Art Nouveau,
most active in Moscow (Lev Kekushev, Fyodor Schechtel and William
Walcot). While it remained a popular choice until the outbreak of World
War II, in 1905-1914 it gave way to the Russian neoclassical
revival—merging the Empire style and palladian tradition with
contemporary construction technology.

<center>
[File:Admiralty.jpg|Admiralty](File:Admiralty.jpg|Admiralty) building
(1704–1706) <File:Petropavlovskaia> Krepost aerial.jpg|Peter and Paul
Fortress (1706–1740)
[File:PeterhofGrandCascade.JPG|Peterhof](File:PeterhofGrandCascade.JPG|Peterhof)
Palace (1714—1755) [File:Смольный](File:Смольный) собор.jpg|Smolny
Convent (1744–1764) <File:Catherine> Palace.jpg|Catherine Palace in
Tsarskoye Selo (1752–1757) <File:Winter> Palace SPB from Palace
Square.jpg|Winter Palace (1762–1796) <File:Spb> 06-2012
MichaelCastle.jpg|Saint Michael's Castle (1797–1801) <File:View> to
Saint Isaac's Cathedral by Ivan Smelov.jpg|Saint Isaac's Cathedral
(1819–1858) <File:Moscow> 05-2012 Bolshoi after renewal.jpg|Bolshoi
Theatre (1821–1825) <File:Grand> Kremlin Palace, Moscow.jpg|Grand
Kremlin Palace (1837-1849) <File:Hram> Christa
Spasitelya2011.jpg|Cathedral of Christ the Saviour (1860–1883)
<File:Moscow> State Historical Museum Red Square.jpg|State Historical
Museum (1875—1881) <File:Moscow> - GUM.jpg|GUM department store
(1890–1893) <File:Moscow> 05-2012 TretyakovGallery.jpg|Tretyakov gallery
(1902-1904)

</center>
Post-Revolution (1917–1932)
---------------------------

In the first year of Soviet rule all architects refusing to emigrate
(and the new generation) denounced any classical heritage in their work
and began to propagate formalism, the most influential of all Revivalist
themes. Great plans were drawn for large, technically advanced cities.
The most ambitious of all was the Tower of the Third Internationale,
planned in 1919 by Vladimir Tatlin (1885–1953)—а 400-meter spiral, wound
around a tilted central axis with rotating glass chambers. Impossible in
real life, the Tatlin Tower inspired a generation of constructivist
architects in Russia and abroad. The Shukhov Tower, rising above Moscow,
was completed in 1922. According to the initial plans the Hyperboloid
Tower by Vladimir Shukhov (with a height of had an estimated mass of,
while the Eiffel Tower in Paris (with a height of ) weighs .

An important priority during the post-revolutionary period was the mass
reconstruction of cities. In 1918 Alexey Shchusev (1873–1949) and Ivan
Zholtovsky founded the Mossovet Architectural Workshop, where the
complex planning of Moscow's reconstruction as a new Soviet capital took
place. The workshop employed young architects who later emerged as
avant-garde leaders. At the same time architectural education,
concentrated in the Vkhutemas, was divided between revivalists and
modernists.

In 1919 Petrograd saw a similar planning and educational setup, headed
by experienced revivalist Ivan Fomin (1872–1936). Other cities followed
suit, and the results of the work carried out there were to make
dramatic changes in traditional Russian city layout. The first
large-scale development templates (*generalny plan*) were drawn there.
The city was planned as a series of new wide avenues, massive public
structures and the improvement of workers' housing with heat and
plumbing. The first apartment building of this period was completed in
1923, followed by a surge of public-housing construction in 1925-1929.

In Petrograd from 1917 to 1919 the first example of the new style was
built on the Field of Mars— a monument, "Strugglers of the Revolution",
designed by Lev Rudnev (1886–1956). This complex consisted of a series
of simple, expressive granite monoliths and became the focal point for
further development in Soviet sculptural and memorial architecture. The
most famous construction of this time, however, was Lenin's Mausoleum by
Alexey Shchusev. Originally it was a temporary wooden structure, topped
by a pyramid, with two wings (for entry and exit). In 1930 it was
replaced with the present building, built of stone. The combination of
dark red and black labradorite enhanced its slender, precise
construction.

The rapid development of technological processes and materials also
influenced constructivist elements in structure design. During the
erection of the Volkhov Hydroelectric Station (1918–26, architects
O.Munts and V.Pokrovsky), the traditional outline on the window arches
is still used (despite concrete being used in construction). The Dnieper
Hydroelectric Station (1927–32), built by a collective of architects
headed by Viktor Vesnin (1882–1950), has an innovative design featuring
a curved dam with a rhythmic pattern of foundations. Creative unions
played a large role in the architectural life of 1920s Russia. One of
these was the Association of New Architects (*Asnova*), formed in 1923,
which promoted the idea of synthesising architecture and other creative
arts to give buildings an almost sculptural feeling. These buildings
were to serve as visual points for the orientation of a human in space.
Members of *Asnova* also designed Moscow's first skyscrapers, none of
which were realised at the time (1923–1926).

Another innovation from post-revolutionary Russia was a new type of
public building: the workers' club and the Palace of Culture. These
became a new focus for architects, who used the visual expression of
large elements combined with industrial motifs. The most famous of these
was the Zuev Club (1927–29) in Moscow by Ilya Golosov (1883–1945), whose
composition relied on the dynamic contrast of simple shapes, planes,
complete walls and glazed surfaces.

Symbolic expression in construction was a feature in works designed by
Konstantin Melnikov (1890–1974), notably the Rusakov Workers' Club
(1927–1929) in Moscow. Visually, the building resembles part of a gear;
each of the three cantilevered concrete "teeth" is a balcony of the main
auditorium, which could be used individually or combined into a large
theater hall. The sharpness of its composition and the "transition" of
internal space (called by Melnikov a "tensed muscle") made it one of the
most important examples of Soviet architecture.

<center>
<File:Tatlin's> Tower maket 1919 year.jpg|Tatlin's Tower <File:Shukhov>
Tower photo by Sergei Arsenyev 2006.JPG|Shukhov Tower in Moscow
<File:Kauchuk> club moscow architect melnikov.jpg|Kauchuk Factory Club
<File:Bus> melnikov.JPG|Bakhmetevsky Bus Garage
[File:EL-LISSITZKY-3.JPG|Printing](File:EL-LISSITZKY-3.JPG|Printing)
plant for *Ogoniok* magazine <File:Moscow> kremlin senate
mausloleum.jpg|Lenin's mausoleum <File:Konstantin> Melnikov, horseshoe
garage, 27 Novoryazanskaya Street, Moscow.jpg|Novo-Ryazanskaya Street
Garage [File:Клуб](File:Клуб) имени Зуева.JPG|Zuev Workers' Club
<File:Power> station Erich Mendelsohn 1.JPG|Red Banner Textile Factory
<File:Melnikov> House photo by Arssenev.jpg|Melnikov House (1927–1929)

</center>
Postwar Soviet Union
--------------------

Stalinist architecture put a premium on conservative monumentalism.
During the 1930s there was rapid urbanisation as a result of Stalin's
policies, and there was an international competition to build the Palace
of the Soviets in Moscow at that time. After 1945, the focus was on both
rebuilding structures destroyed in World War II and erecting new ones:
seven high-rise buildings were built at symbolic points in the Moscow
area. The construction of Moscow University (1948–1953), by Lev Rudnev
and associates, is particularly notable for its use of space. Another
example is the Exhibition Centre in Moscow, built for the second
All-Union Agricultural Exhibition (*VSKhV*) in 1954. This featured a
series of pavilions, each decorated in representative style. Other
well-known examples are the stations of the Moscow and Saint Petersburg
Metros built during the 1940s and 1950s, famous for their extravagant
design and vivid decoration. In general, Stalinist architecture changed
the appearance of many post-war cities; much survives to this day in
central avenues and public buildings.

Following Stalin's death in 1953, social and political changes rocked
the country; construction priorities and architecture were also
affected. In 1955 Nikita Khrushchev, faced with the slow pace of housing
construction, called for drastic measures to accelerate the process.
This involved developing new mass-production technology and removing
"decorative extras" from buildings. This put an effective end to
Stalinist architecture; however, the transition was slow. Most projects
in the planning state or under construction by 1955 were directly
affected; the result, at times, was entire areas becoming esthetically
asymmetrical. A well-known example occurred in the postwar
reconstruction of the Ukrainian capital, Kiev, in which the planned
Kreschatik avenue and its central square (Ploschad Kalinina) were to
form a single rich space enclosed by Stalinist construction. However, as
the buildings enclosing the latter were in completion, the architects
were forced to alter their plans and the area was left unfinished until
the early 1980s. In particular Hotel Ukrayina, which was to crown the
square with a look similar to one of Seven Sisters (Moscow)|Moscow's
"Seven sisters", was left as a solid shape without a top spire or any
rich external decoration.

Nevertheless, as the buildings became more square and simple they
brought with them a new style fueled by the Space Age: functionality.
The State Kremlin Palace is an hommage to an earlier attempt to bridge
rapidly changing styles dictated by the state. The Ostankino Tower, by
Nikolai Nikitin, symbolizes technological advances and the future. In
addition to simpler buildings, the 1960s are remembered for massive
housing plans. A typical project was developed using concrete panels to
make a simple, five-story house. These *Pyatietazhki* became the
dominant housing construction. Although rapidly built, their quality was
poor compared with earlier housing; their monotonous appearance
contributed to the grey and dull stereotype characteristic of socialist
cities.

As the 1970s began, Leonid Brezhnev allowed architects more freedom;
soon, housing of varied design was built. Blocks of flats were taller
and more decorated; large mosaics on their sides became a feature. In
nearly all cases, these were built not as standalone construction but as
part of large estates  which soon became a central feature of
socialist cities. Public buildings were built with a variety of themes.
Some (like the White House of Russia) made direct connections to earlier
1950s architecture, with a white marble-faced exterior and large
*bas-reliefs* on the wings.

<center>
<File:Moscow> State University crop.jpg|MGU main building
[File:Russia-Moscow-VDNH-3.jpg|All-Russia](File:Russia-Moscow-VDNH-3.jpg|All-Russia)
Exhibition Centre <File:Opera> House in Chelyabinsk.JPG|Chelyabinsk
Opera House <File:Dom> sovetov na moscpl.jpg|House of Soviets
[File:NovosibirskTheaterSide.jpg|Novosibirsk](File:NovosibirskTheaterSide.jpg|Novosibirsk)
Opera and Ballet Theatre [File:Останкинская](File:Останкинская)
телебашня править .jpg|Ostankino Tower
[File:MetroMoskwa1.jpg|Moscow](File:MetroMoskwa1.jpg|Moscow) Metro
<File:Luzhniki> Inside View B Stand.jpg|Luzhniki Stadium <File:Supreme>
soviet of Russia (1988).jpg|Moscow White House <File:Brick> Khrushchev
house in Tomsk.jpg|Typical Khrushchyovka, in Tomsk

</center>
Modern Russia
-------------

As the Soviet Union fell apart many of its projects were put on hold,
and some cancelled altogether. However, for the first time there was no
longer any control over what theme a building should have or how high it
should be. As a result, with generally improving financial conditions
architecture grew at a high rate. For the first time modern methods of
skyscraper construction were implemented; this resulted in an ambitious
business centre in Moscow, Moscow City. In other cases, architects
returned to successful designs of Stalinist architecture, which resulted
in buildings like the Triumph Palace in Moscow.

See also
--------

-   List of tallest buildings in Russia
-   List of Russian architects
-   Tented roof
-   Stalinist architecture
-   Constructivist architecture
-   Palace of Soviets
-   Latvian Academy of Sciences
-   Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Warsaw
-   Warsaw Palace of Culture and Science
-   Russian Church, Sofia
-   Russian Revival Architecture
-   Bochka Roof

Notes
-----

References
----------

-   "Architecture: Kievan Rus and Russia" in *Encyclopædia Britannica
    (Macropedia) vol. 13,* 15th ed., 2003, p. 921.
-   William Craft Brumfield, *Landmarks of Russian Architecture: A
    Photographic Survey.* Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach, 1997
-   John Fleming, Hugh Honour, Nikolaus Pevsner. "Russian Architecture"
    in *The Penguin Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape
    Architecture*, 5th ed., [1966] 1998, pp. 493–498, London: Penguin.
    ISBN 0-670-88017-5.
-   [Russian art and
    architecture](http://www.bartleby.com/65/ru/Russiana.html), in The
    Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition, 2001–05.
-   [*Encyclopædia Britannica*Western architecture retrieved 12 August
    2005](http://www.search.eb.com/eb/article-47386)
-   [About.com feature on Russian architecture retrieved 12 August
    2005](http://architecture.about.com/library/weekly/aa090501a.htm)
-   [Grove Art Online articles on Russian architecture Oxford University
    Press 2005 retrieved 12
    August](http://www.groveart.com/shared/views/article.html?section=art.074586.3.3.2&authstatuscode=200)
-   *Russian Life* July/August 2000 Volume 43 Issue 4 "Faithful
    Reproduction" an interview with Russian architecture expert William
    Brumfield on the rebuilding of Christ the Saviour Cathedral

Further reading
---------------

-   Fletcher, Banister; Cruickshank, Dan, [*Sir Banister Fletcher's a
    History of
    Architecture*](http://books.google.com/books?id=Gt1jTpXAThwC&printsec=frontcover),
    Architectural Press, 20th edition, 1996 (first published 1896)bISBN
    0-7506-2267-9. Cf. Part Two, Chapter 12.
-   William Craft Brumfield, *A History of Russian Architecture.*
    Seattle and London: University of Washington Press, [1993] 2004.
    ISBN 0-295-98393-0

External links
--------------

-   [The William C. Brumfield Collection, part of *Meeting of Frontiers:
    Siberia, Alaska, and the American
    West*](http://international.loc.gov/intldl/mtfhtml/mfdigcol/mfdcphot.html#a_eng)
-   [Soviet
    Architecture](http://www.skyscrapercity.com/showthread.php?t=686984)
-   [Russian
    Architecture](http://www.skypalace.org/europe/slavic/east_slavic/russia.shtml)
-   [Russian photosite of Orthodox architecture](http://www.sobory.ru)
-   [Russian society of architects](http://www.archi.ru)
-   ["Architectural links between Ukraine and Russia" by Igor
    Grabar](http://www.heritage.com.ua/arhitektura/doslidzhennja/ArhUkrRos/ArhUkrRos01.htm)

Category:Russian architecture| Category:Architectural history
Category:Russian art
