The **Armed Forces of the Russian Federation**  are the military
services of Russia, established after the dissolution of the Soviet
Union. On 7 May 1992, Boris Yeltsin signed a presidential decree
establishing the Russian Ministry of Defence and placing all Soviet
Armed Forces troops on the territory of the RSFSR under Russian control.
The commander-in-chief of the armed forces is the president of Russia.
Although the Russian armed forces were formed in 1992, the Russian
military dates its roots back to the times of the Kievan Rus'.

The number of troops is specified by decree of the President of Russia.
On 1 January 2008, a number of 2,019,629 units, including military of
1,134,800 units, was set. In 2010 the International Institute for
Strategic Studies (IISS) estimated that the Russian Armed Forces
numbered about 1,040,000 active troops and in the region of 2,035,000
reserves (largely ex-conscripts). As opposed to personnel specified by
decree, actual personnel in the forces and paid was reported by the
Audit Chamber of Russia as 766,000 in October 2013. As of December 2013,
the armed forces are at 82 percent of the required manpower.

According to SIPRI, Russia spent nearly \$72 billion on arms in 2011.
Russia is planning further increases in its military spending, with
draft budgets showing a 53% rise in real terms up to 2014. However,
SIPRI adds that many analysts are doubtful whether the industry will be
able to deliver on such ambitious plans after decades of stagnation
following the collapse of the Soviet Union.

History
-------

As the Soviet Union officially dissolved on 31 December 1991, the Soviet
military was left in limbo. For the next year and a half various
attempts to keep its unity and transform it into the military of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) failed. Over time, the units
stationed in the newly independent republics swore loyalty to their new
national governments, while a series of treaties between the newly
independent states divided up the military's assets.

Apart from assuming control of the bulk of the former Soviet Internal
Troops and KGB Border Troops, seemingly the only independent defence
move the new Russian leadership made before March 1992 was to announce
the creation of a 'National Guard', Until 1995, it was planned to form
at least 11 brigades numbering 3-5,000 each, a total of no more than
100,000. National Guard military units were to be deployed in 10
regions, including in Moscow (three brigades), Leningrad (two brigades),
and a number of other important cities and regions . By the end of
September 1991 in Moscow the National Guard was about 15,000 strong,
mostly ex Soviet Armed Forces servicemen. In the end, Yeltsin tabled a
decree "On the temporary position of the Russian Guard," but it was not
put into practice.

After signing the Belavezha Accords on 21 December 1991, the new CIS
countries signed a protocol on the temporary appointment of Marshal of
Aviation Yevgeny Shaposhnikov as Minister of Defence and commander of
the armed forces in their territory, including strategic nuclear forces.
On 14 February 1992, he formally became Supreme Commander of the CIS
Armed Forces. On 16 March 1992 a decree by Boris Yeltsin created *The
Armed Forces of the Russian Federation,* the operational control of
Allied High Command and the Ministry of Defense, which was headed by
President. Finally, on 7 May 1992 Yelsin signed a decree establishing
the armed forces and Yeltsin assumed the duties of the Supreme
Commander. Pavel Grachev became the first Minister of Defence, and was
made Russia's first Army General on assuming the post.

On 7 May 1992, Yeltsin appointed himself as the new Russian Minister of
Defence, marking a crucial step in the creation of the new Armed Forces.
By August or December 1993 CIS military structures had become CIS
military cooperation structures with all real influence lost.

In the next few years, Russian forces withdrew from central and eastern
Europe, as well as from some newly independent post-Soviet republics.
While in most places the withdrawal took place without any problems, the
Russian Armed Forces remained in some disputed areas such as the
Sevastopol naval base in the Crimea as well as in Abkhazia and
Transnistria. The Armed Forces have several bases in foreign countries,
especially on territory of the former Soviet Republics.

A new military doctrine, promulgated in November 1993, implicitly
acknowledged the contraction of the old Soviet military into a regional
military power without global ambitions. In keeping with its emphasis on
the threat of regional conflicts, the doctrine called for a Russian
military that is smaller, lighter, and more mobile, with a higher degree
of professionalism and with greater rapid deployment capability. Such
change proved extremely difficult to achieve. Under Defence Minister
Pavel Grachev, little military reform took place, though there was a
plan to create more deployable Mobile Forces. Later Defence Minister
Rodionov had good qualifications but did not manage to institute lasting
change. Only under Defence Minister Igor Sergeyev did a certain amount
of limited reform begin, though attention was focused upon the Strategic
Rocket Forces.

### 2008 military reform

Significant reforms were announced in late 2008 under Defence Minister
Anatoliy Serdyukov, and major structural reorganisation began in 2009.
Key elements of the reforms announced in October 2008 include reducing
the armed forces to a strength of one million by 2012 (planned end-date
was 2016 ); reducing the number of officers; centralising officer
training from 65 military schools into 10 'systemic' military training
centres; reducing the size of the central command; introducing more
civilian logistics and auxiliary staff; elimination of cadre-strength
formations; reorganising the reserves; reorganising the army into a
brigade system; and reorganising air forces into an air base system
instead of regiments. On 17 October 2012 the head of the State Duma’s
Defense Committee told RIA Novosti that Russia plans to boost annual
defense spending by 59 percent to almost 3 trillion rubles (\$97
billion) in 2015 up from \$61 billion in 2012. “Targeted national
defense spending as a percentage of GDP will amount to 3.2 percent in
2013, 3.4 percent in 2014 and 3.7 percent in 2015,” Defense Committee
chairman Vladimir Komoedov is quoted as saying in the committee’s
conclusion on the draft budget for 2013-2015.

The number of military units is to be reduced in accordance with the
table:

  Arms and branches         2008    2012   Reduction
  ------------------------- ------- ------ -----------
  Ground Forces             1,890   172    -90 %
  Air Force                 340     180    -48 %
  Navy                      240     123    -49 %
  Strategic Rocket Forces   12      8      -33 %
  Space Forces              7       6      -15 %
  Airborne Troops           6       5      -17 %

An essential part of the military reform is its down-sizing. By the
beginning of the reform, there were about 1,200,000 active personnel in
the Russian army. Largely, the reductions falls within the officers.
Personnel are to be reduced according to the table:

  Category of military men              1 September 2008   1 December 2009   Planned for 2012   Reduction
  ------------------------------------- ------------------ ----------------- ------------------ -----------
  General/Admiral                       1,107              780               877                −20.8 %
  Colonel/Captain 1st Rank              25,665                               9,114              −64.5 %
  Lieutenant Colonel/Captain 2nd Rank   19,300                               7,500              −61 %
  Major/Captain 3rd Rank                99,550                               25,000             −75 %
  Captain/Captain Lieutenant            90,000                               40,000             −56 %
  First Lieutenant/Senior Lieutenant    30,000                               35,000             +17 %
  Lieutenant/Lieutenant                 20,000                               26,000             +30 %
  Officers in total                     365,000                              220,000            −40 %
  Praporshchik/Warrant Officer          90,000             0                 0                  −100 %
  Warrant officer                       50,000             0                 0                  −100 %

The total number of the officer corps scheduled to reduce from 335
thousand to 150 thousand, but in early February 2011 Defense Minister
Anatoly Serdyukov announced the decision to increase officers by 70 000
- to 220 thousand to counteract this.

Another aspect of the modernization is that by the end of 2013 a series
of comfort improvements are planned for all troops, for example showers
in all army quarters.

Structure
---------

The Defence Ministry of the Russian Federation serves as the
administrative body of the Armed Forces. Since Soviet times, the General
Staff has acted as the main commanding and supervising body of the
Russian armed forces: U.S. expert William Odom said in 1998, that 'the
Soviet General Staff without the MoD is conceivable, but the MoD without
the General Staff is not.' However, currently the General Staff's role
is being reduced to that of the Ministry's department of strategic
planning, the Minister himself, currently Sergey Shoygu may now be
gaining further executive authority over the troops. Other departments
include the personnel directorate as well as the Rear Services, railway
troops, Signal Troops and construction troops. The Chief of the General
Staff is currently General of the Army Valery Gerasimov.

The Russian military is divided into the following services: the Russian
Ground Forces, the Russian Navy, and the Russian Air Force. There are
also three independent *arms of service*: Strategic Missile Troops,
Russian Aerospace Defense Forces, and the Russian Airborne Troops. The
Air Defence Troops, the former Soviet Air Defence Forces, have been
subordinated into the Air Force since 1998. The Armed Forces as a whole
are traditionally referred to as the **Army** (*armiya*), except in some
cases, the Navy is specifically singled out.

Since late 2010 the Ground Forces as well as the Air Forces and Navy are
distributed among four military districts: Western Military District,
Southern Military District, Central Military District, and the Eastern
Military District which also constitute four Joint Strategic Commands —
West, South, Central, and East. Previously from 1992 to 2010, the Ground
Forces were divided into six military districts: Moscow, Leningrad,
North Caucausian, Privolzhsk-Ural, Siberian and Far Eastern and Russia's
four fleets and one flotilla were organizations on par with the Ground
Forces' Military Districts. These six MDs were merged into the four new
MDs, which now also incorporate the air forces and naval forces.

There is one remaining Russian military base, the 102nd Military Base,
in Armenia left of the former Transcaucasus Group of Forces. It likely
reports to the Southern Military District.

The Navy consists of four fleets and one flotilla:

-   **Northern Fleet** (HQ at Severomorsk) subordinated to Joint
    Strategic Command West.
-   **Baltic Fleet** (HQ at Kaliningrad in the exclave of Kaliningrad
    Oblast) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command West.
-   **Black Sea Fleet** (HQ at Sevastopol, disputed between Russia and
    Ukraine, subordinated to Joint Strategic Command South. (In 1997,
    the Ukrainian government agreed that Russia would be allowed to
    lease several base areas around Sevastopol until 2017.) This lease
    has been extended by 25 years through 2042 with an option for an
    additional five years through 2047.
-   **Caspian Flotilla** (HQ at Astrakhan) subordinated to Joint
    Strategic Command South.
-   **Pacific Fleet** (HQ at Vladivostok) subordinated to Joint
    Strategic Command East.

The Kaliningrad Special Region, under the command of the Commander
Baltic Fleet, comprises Ground & Coastal Forces, formerly the 11th
Guards Army, with a motor rifle division and a motor rifle brigade, and
a fighter aviation regiment of Sukhoi Su-27 'Flanker', as well as other
forces.

Similarly, the Northeast Group of Troops and Forces, headquartered at
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, comprises all Russian Armed Forces components
in the Kamchatka Oblast and the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug [district] and
is subordinate to the Commander Pacific Fleet headquartered in
Vladivostok.

In mid-2010 a reorganisation was announced which consolidated military
districts and the navy's fleets into four Joint Strategic Commands
(OSC). Geographically divided, the four commands are:

-   Joint Strategic Command West - Western Military District (HQ in St.
    Petersburg), includes the Northern and Baltic Fleets;
-   Joint Strategic Command South - Southern Military District (HQ in
    Rostov-on-Don) includes the Black Sea Fleet and Caspian Flotilla;
-   Joint Strategic Command Center - Central Military District (HQ in
    Yekaterinburg);
-   Joint Strategic Command East - Eastern Military District (HQ in
    Khabarovsk), includes the Pacific Fleet.

The plan, was put in place on 1 December 2010, and mirrors a proposed
reorganisation by former Chief of the General Staff Army General Yuri
Baluyevsky for a Regional Command East which was not in fact
implemented. The four commands were set up by a decree of President
Medvedev on 14 July 2010. In July 2011, an Operational-Strategic Command
of Missile-Space Defence has also been established on the basis of the
former Special Purpose Command of the Russian Air Force. It is expected
to be operational on 1 December 2011. A decision whether the VKO will be
subordinated to the Air Force or the Space Forces has yet to be taken.
Commander of the VKO is General-Lieutenant Valery Ivanov. A Presidential
decree of January 2011 named commanders for several of the new
organisational structures.

Russian military command posts, according to globalsecurity.org, include
Chekhov/Sharapovo about south of Moscow, for the General Staff and
President,([1](http://www.windowonheartland.net/2012/02/russias-top-secret-bases.html))
Chaadayevka near Penza, Voronovo in Moscow, and a facility at Lipetsk
all for the national leadership, Yamantau in the Urals, and command
posts for the Strategic Rocket Forces at Kuntsevo in Moscow (primary)
and Kosvinsky Mountain in the Urals (alternate). It is speculated that
many of the Moscow bunkers are linked by the special underground Moscow
Metro 2 line.

Russian security bodies not under the control of the Ministry of Defence
include the Internal Troops of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the
Border Guard Service of Russia (part of the Federal Security Service),
the Kremlin Regiment and the rest of the Federal Protective Service
(Russia), and the Ministry of Emergency Situations, the country's civil
defense service since 1995 and successor to earlier civil defense units.

Personnel
---------

, some 480,000 young men are brought into the Army via conscription in
two call-ups each year. The term of service is 12 months. Eligible age
is 18 to 27 years old.

Deferments are provided to undergraduate and graduate students, men
solely supporting disabled relatives, parents of at least two children
and — upon Presidential proclamation — to some employees of
military-oriented enterprises. Men holding Ph.D. as well as sons and
brothers of servicemen killed or disabled during their military service
are released of conscription.

There are widespread problems with hazing in the Army, known as
dedovshchina, where first-year draftees are bullied by second-year
draftees, a practice that appeared in its current form after the change
to a two-year service term in 1967. To combat this problem, a new decree
was signed in March 2007, which cut the conscription service term from
24 to 18 months. The term was cut further to one year on 1 January 2008.

Thirty percent of Russian Armed Forces' personnel were contract
servicemen at the end of 2005. For the foreseeable future, the Armed
Forces will be a mixed contract/conscript force. The Russian Armed
Forces need to maintain a mobilization reserve to have manning resources
capable of reinforcing the permanent readiness forces if the permanent
readiness forces cannot deter or suppress an armed conflict on their
own.

The ranks of the Russian military are also open to non-Russian citizens
of the Commonwealth of Independent States, of which Russia is the
largest member. By December 2003, the Russian parliament had approved a
law in principle to permit the Armed Forces to employ foreign nationals
on contract by offering them Russian citizenship after several years
service. Yet up to 2010, foreigners could only serve in Russia's armed
forces after getting a Russian passport. Under a 2010 Defence Ministry
plan, foreigners without dual citizenship would be able to sign up for
five-year contracts and will be eligible for Russian citizenship after
serving three years. The change could open the way for CIS citizens to
get fast-track Russian citizenship, and counter the effects of Russia's
demographic crisis on its army recruitment.

Awards and decorations of the Armed Forces are covered at Awards and
Emblems of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation.

On 17 November 2011, General Nikolai Makarov said that Russia had
reached a crisis in the conscript service where there simply were not
sufficient able bodied men to draft and was forced to halve its
conscription.

Each soldier in duty receives Identity Card of the Russian Armed Forces.

Budget
------

In 1988 military spending was a single line item in the Soviet state
budget, totaling 21 billion rubles. Given the size of the military
establishment, however, the actual figure was considered to be far
higher. However, between 1991 and 1997 newly independent Russia's
defence spending fell by a factor of eight in real prices. Between 1988
and 1993 weapons production in Russia fell by at least 50% for virtually
every major weapons system.

In 1998, when Russia experienced a severe financial crisis, its military
expenditure in real terms reached its lowest point— barely one-quarter
of the USSR's in 1991, and two-fifths of the level of 1992, the first
year of Russia's independent existence.

Defence spending is consistently increasing by at least a minimum of
one-third year-on-year, leading to overall defence expenditure almost
quadrupling over the past six years, and according to Finance Minister
Alexei Kudrin, this rate is to be sustained through 2010. Official
government military spending for 2005 was US \$32.4 billion, though
various sources, have estimated Russia's military expenditures to be
considerably higher than the reported amount. Estimating Russian
military expenditure is beset with difficulty; the annual IISS Military
Balance has underscored the problem numerous times within its section on
Russia. The IISS Military Balance comments - 'By simple
observation..[the military budget] would appear to be lower than is
suggested by the size of the armed forces or the structure of the
military-industrial complex, and thus neither of the figures is
particularly useful for comparative analysis'. By some estimates,
overall Russian defence expenditure is now at the second highest in the
world after the USA. According to Alexander Kanshin, Chairman of the
Public Chamber of Russia on affairs of veterans, military personnel, and
their families, the Russian military is losing up to US\$13 billion to
corruption every year.

On 16 September 2008 Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced
that in 2009, Russian defence budget will be increased to a record
amount of \$50 billion.

On 16 February 2009 Russia's deputy defence minister said state defence
contracts would not be subject to cuts this year despite the ongoing
financial crisis, and that there would be no decrease in 2009. The
budget would still be 1,376 billion roubles and in the current exchange
rates this would amount to \$41.5 billion.

However, later that month, due to the world financial crisis, the
Russian Parliament's Defence Committee stated that the Russian defence
budget would instead be slashed by 15 percent, from \$40 billion to \$34
billion, with further cuts to come. On 5 May 2009, First Deputy Prime
Minister Sergei Ivanov said that the defence budget for 2009 will be 1.3
trillion rubles (US\$39.4 billion). 322 billion rubles are allocated to
purchase weapons, and the rest of the fund will be spent on
construction, fuel storage and food supply. According to the head of the
Defense Committee of the State Duma Vladimir Komoyedov Russia plans to
spend 101.15 billion rubles on nuclear weapons in 2013-2015."The budget
provisions under "The Nuclear Weapons Complex" section in 2013-2015 will
amount to 29.28 billion rubles, 33.3 billion rubles and 38.57 billion
rubles respectively," Komoyedov said, Vechernaya Moskva reports.

Komoyedov added that in 2012 the spending on nuclear weapons made up
27.4 billion rubles. The draft law "On the Federal Budget for 2013 and
for the planning period of 2014 and 2015" will be discussed in the first
reading on 19 October 2012, The Voice of Russia reports. In a meeting in
Sochi on November 2013, President Putin said the country's defense
budget will reach 2.3 trillion roubles, stressing the huge amount in
comparison to the 2003 budget, which stood on 600 billion rubles.

### Procurement

About 70% of the former Soviet Union's defense industries are located in
the Russian Federation. Many defense firms have been privatized; some
have developed significant partnerships with firms in other countries.

The structure of the state defense order under President Putin changed.
Priority was given to the acquisition of sophisticated modern weapons,
in light of the events in Chechnya. Previously, financing of strategic
nuclear deterrence forces had been a priority, and up to 80% of
assignments for the state defense order were spent on their needs. It
was planned that beginning from 2000 the state defense order would
comprise two priority directions: assignments for the nuclear deterrence
forces, and assignments for purchase of conventional arms including the
precision guided weapons.

The recent steps towards modernization of the Armed Forces have been
made possible by Russia's economic resurgence based on oil and gas
revenues as well a strengthening of its own domestic market. Currently,
the military is in the middle of a major equipment upgrade, with the
government in the process of spending about \$200 billion (what equals
to about \$400 billion in PPP dollars) on development and production of
military equipment between 2006-2015 under the **State Armament
Programme for 2007-2015** (GPV — госпрограмма вооружения). Mainly as a
result of lessons learned during the August War, the **State Armament
Programme for 2011-2020** was launched in December 2010. Prime Minister
Putin announced that 20-21.5 trillion rubles (over \$650 billion) will
be allocated to purchase new hardware in the next 10 years. The aim is
to have a growth of 30% of modern equipment in the army, navy and air
force by 2015, and of 70% by 2020. In some categories, the proportion of
new weapon systems will reach 80% or even 100%. At this point, the
Russian MoD plans to purchase, among others, up to 250 ICBMs, 800
aircraft, 1,200 helicopters, 44 submarines, 36 frigates, 28 corvettes,
18 cruisers, 24 destroyers, 6 aircraft carriers, and 62 air defense
battalions. Several existing types will be upgraded.

As of 2011, Russia's chief military prosecutor said that 20% of the
defense budget was being stolen or defrauded yearly.

Nuclear weapons
---------------

As of November 2012, the Federation of American Scientists estimated
that Russia has approximately 1,499 deployed strategic warheads, and
another 1,022 nondeployed strategic warheads and approximately 2,000
tactical nuclear warheads. Russia's Strategic Rocket Forces controls its
land-based nuclear warheads, while the Navy controls the submarine based
missiles and the Air Force the air-launched warheads. Russia's nuclear
warheads are deployed in four areas:

1.  Land-based immobile (silos), like R-36.
2.  Land-based mobile, like RT-2UTTKh Topol-M and new RS-24 Yars.
3.  Submarine based, like RSM-56 Bulava.
4.  Air-launched warheads of the Russian Air Forces' Long Range Aviation
    Command

Russian military doctrine sees NATO expansion as one of the threats for
the Russian Federation and reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in
response to a conventional aggression that can endanger the existence of
the state. In keeping with this, the country's nuclear forces received
adequate funding throughout the late 1990s. The number of
intercontinental ballistic missiles and warheads on active duty has
declined over the years, in part in keeping with arms limitation
agreements with the U.S. and in part due to insufficient spending on
maintenance, but this is balanced by the deployment of new missiles as
proof against missile defences. Russia has developed the new RT-2UTTKh
Topol-M (SS-27) missiles that are stated to be able to penetrate any
missile defence, including the planned U.S. National Missile Defence.
The missile can change course in both air and space to avoid
countermeasures. It is designed to be launched from land-based, mobile
TEL units. Russian nuclear forces are confident that they can carry out
a successful retaliation strike if attacked.

Because of international awareness of the danger that Russian nuclear
technology might fall into the hands of terrorists or rogue officers who
it was feared might want to use nuclear weapons to threaten or attack
other countries, the Federal government of the United States and many
other countries provided considerable financial assistance to the
Russian nuclear forces in early 1990s. Many friendly countries gave huge
amounts of money in lieu for Russian Arms purchase deals which kept
Russian Agencies functioning. This money went in part to finance
decommissioning of warheads under international agreements, such the
Cooperative Threat Reduction programme, but also to improve security and
personnel training in Russian nuclear facilities.

In the late evening of 11 September 2007 the fuel-air explosive AVBPM or
"Father of all bombs" was successfully field-tested. According to the
Russian military, the new weapon will replace several smaller types of
nuclear bombs in its arsenal.

Notes
-----

-   "How are the mighty fallen" The Economist. 2–8 July 2005. pp. 45–46

Further reading
---------------

-   Galeotti, Mark, 'Organised crime and Russian security forces:
    mafiya, militia and military', Journal of Conflict, Security and
    Development, issue 1:2, 2001.
-   Ivanov, Henry, 'Country Briefing: Russia—Austere deterrence', Jane's
    Defence Weekly, 28 April 2006
-   -   Pynnöniemi, K., ['Russia's Defence Reform: Assessing the real
    "Serdyukov
    heritage"'](http://www.fiia.fi/en/publication/330/russia_s_defence_reform/),
    FIIA Briefing Paper 126, 26 March 2013, [The Finnish Institute of
    International Affairs](http://www.fiia.fi/en/).
-   Turbiville, G., 'Organized crime and the Russian armed forces',
    Transnational Organized Crime, vol. 1, issue 4, 1995, pp. 55–73;
-   Waters, T., 'Crime in the Russian military', CSRC Paper C90,
    (Camberley: Conflict Studies Research Centre, 1996).

References
----------

-   -   Keir Giles, Military Service in Russia: No New Model Army,
    Conflict Studies Research Centre, May 2007
-   International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance,
    various editions
-   

External links
--------------

-   [Russian Ministry of Defense](http://eng.mil.ru/) (in English)
-   [Russia's Military Analysis](http://warfare.be/) A very
    comprehensive online database of modern Russian arms and military
    technologies. Website also has discussion forums, videos and more.
-   [Russia Military
    Guide](http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/russia/index.html)
    Includes satellite photos of bases.
-   [British Conflict Studies Research Centre papers on Russian armed
    forces](http://www.defac.ac.uk/colleges/csrc/document-listings/russian/)
-   [kamouflage.net](http://www.kamouflage.net/country/00156.php)
    Camouflage uniforms used by Russian Federation armed forces
-   -   [Boy with reattached legs joins Russian
    army](http://rt.com/Top_News/2010-08-31/boy-reattached-legs-army.html)
    (RT article)
-   [Authoritative Russian Defence Policy
    blog](http://russiandefpolicy.wordpress.com/)
-   [Authoritative Russian Military Reform
    blog](http://russiamil.wordpress.com/)

Category:Military of Russia| Category:Conscript militaries|Russia
Category:Russian Navy
