* * * * *

**Newly emerged republics**

* * * * *

**Allied Intervention**\

* * * * *

**Pro-German armies**

* * * * *

|commander1=

`Vladimir Lenin`\
` Leon Trotsky`\
` Kliment Voroshilov`\
` Mikhail Frunze`

* * * * *

`Nestor Makhno`

|commander2= Alexander Kolchak\
 Lavr Kornilov\
 Anton Denikin\
 Pyotr Wrangel\
 Nikolai Yudenich |strength1 = 3,000,000

* * * * *

103,000 Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine |strength2 =
2,400,000 White Russians |casualties1 = 1,212,824 casualties The records
are incomplete. |casualties2 = At least 1,500,000 |notes = Various
anti-soviet factions also fought each other, for example pro-German
armies fought against Baltic countries while Armenia and Azerbaijan
fought each other etc. }}

The **Russian Civil War** ( *Grazhdanskaya voyna v Rossiy*) (November
1917 – October 1922) was a multi-party war in the former Russian Empire
fought between the Bolshevik Red Army and the White Army, the loosely
allied anti-Bolshevik forces. Many foreign armies warred against the Red
Army, notably the Allied Forces and the pro-German armies. The Red Army
defeated the White Armed Forces of South Russia in Ukraine and the army
led by Aleksandr Kolchak in Siberia in 1919. The remains of the White
forces commanded by Pyotr Nikolayevich Wrangel were beaten in the Crimea
and were evacuated in the autumn of 1920.

Many pro-independence movements emerged after the break-up of the
Russian Empire and fought in the war. A number of them – Finland,
Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland – were established as sovereign
states. The rest of the former Russian Empire was consolidated into the
Soviet Union shortly afterwards.

Background
----------

### February Revolution

After the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, the Russian
Provisional Government was established during the February Revolution of
1917.

### Creation of the Red Army

In the wake of the October Revolution, the old Russian Imperial Army had
been demobilized; the volunteer-based Red Guard was the Bolsheviks' main
military force, augmented by an armed military component of the Cheka,
the Bolshevik state security apparatus. In January, after significant
reverses in combat, War Commissar Leon Trotsky headed the reorganization
of the Red Guard into a *Workers' and Peasants' Red Army,* in order to
create a more professional fighting force. Political commissars were
appointed to each unit of the army to maintain morale and ensure
loyalty.

In June 1918, when it became apparent that a revolutionary army composed
solely of workers would be far too small, Trotsky instituted mandatory
conscription of the rural peasantry into the Red Army. Opposition of
rural Russians to Red Army conscription units was overcome by taking
hostages and shooting them when necessary in order to force compliance,
exactly the same practices used by the White Army officers. Former
Tsarist officers were utilized as "military specialists" (*voenspetsy*),
sometimes taking their families hostage in order to ensure loyalty. At
the start of the war, three quarters of the Red Army officer corps was
composed of former Tsarist officers. By its end, 83% of all Red Army
divisional and corps commanders were ex-Tsarist soldiers.

### Anti-Bolshevik movement

While resistance to the Red Guard began on the very next day after the
Bolshevik uprising, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk and the political ban
became a catalyst for the formation of anti-Bolshevik groups both inside
and outside Russia, pushing them into action against the new regime.

A loose confederation of anti-Bolshevik forces aligned against the
Communist government, including land-owners, republicans, conservatives,
middle-class citizens, reactionaries, pro-monarchists, liberals, army
generals, non-Bolshevik socialists who still had grievances and
democratic reformists, voluntarily united only in their opposition to
Bolshevik rule. Their military forces, bolstered by forced conscriptions
and terror and by foreign influence and led by General Yudenich, Admiral
Kolchak and General Denikin, became known as the White movement
(sometimes referred to as the "White Army"), and they controlled
significant parts of the former Russian Empire for most of the war.

A Ukrainian nationalist movement known as the Green Army was active in
Ukraine in the early part of the war. More significant was the emergence
of an anarchist political and military movement known as the
Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine or the Anarchist Black
Army led by Nestor Makhno. The Black Army, which counted numerous Jews
and Ukrainian peasants in its ranks, played a key part in halting
General Denikin's White Army offensive towards Moscow during 1919, later
ejecting Cossack forces from Crimea.

The remoteness of the Volga Region, the Ural Region, Siberia, and the
Far East was favourable for the anti-Bolshevik powers, and the Whites
set up a number of organizations in the cities of these regions. Some of
the military forces were set up on the basis of clandestine officers'
organisations in the cities.

The Czechoslovak Legions had been part of the Russian army and numbered
around 30,000 troops by October 1917. They had an agreement with the new
Bolshevik government to be evacuated from the Eastern Front via the Port
of Vladivostok to France. The transport from the Eastern Front to the
Port of Vladivostok slowed down in the chaos, and the troops became
dispersed all along the Trans-Siberian Railway. Under pressure from the
Central Powers, Trotsky ordered the disarmament and arrest of the
legionaries, which created tensions with the Bolsheviks.

The Western Allies also expressed their dismay at the Bolsheviks, (1)
upset at the withdrawal of Russia from the war effort, (2) worried about
a possible Russo-German alliance, and perhaps most importantly (3)
galvanised by the prospect of the Bolsheviks making good their threats
to assume no responsibility for, and so default on, Imperial Russia's
massive foreign loans. In addition, there was a concern, shared by many
Central Powers as well, that the socialist revolutionary ideas would
spread to the West. Hence, many of these countries expressed their
support for the Whites, including the provision of troops and supplies.
Winston Churchill declared that Bolshevism must be "strangled in its
cradle". The British and the French had supported Russia on a massive
scale with war materials. After the treaty, it looked like much of that
material would fall into the hands of the Germans. Under this pretext
began allied intervention in the Russian Civil War with the United
Kingdom and France sending troops into Russian ports. There were violent
confrontations with troops loyal to the Bolsheviks.

The German Empire created several short-lived satellite buffer states
within its sphere of influence after the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk: the
"United Baltic Duchy", "Duchy of Courland and Semigallia", "Kingdom of
Lithuania", "Kingdom of Poland", the "Belarusian People’s Republic", and
the "Ukrainian State". Following the defeat of Germany in World War I in
November 1918, these states were abolished.

Finland was the first republic that declared its independence from
Russia in December 1917 and established itself in the ensuing Finnish
Civil War from January to May 1918. The Second Polish Republic,
Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia formed their armies immediately after the
abolition of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty and the start of the Soviet
westward offensive in November 1918.

Geography and chronology
------------------------

[[Image:Russian civil war in the west.svg|left|thumb|350px|

European theatre of the Russian Civil War]]

In the European part of Russia, the war was fought across three main
fronts: the eastern, the southern, and the northwestern. It can also be
roughly split into the following periods.

The first period lasted from the Revolution until the Armistice. Already
on the date of the Revolution, Cossack General Kaledin refused to
recognize it and assumed full governmental authority in the Don region,
where the Volunteer Army began amassing support. The signing of the
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk also resulted in direct Allied intervention in
Russia and the arming of military forces opposed to the Bolshevik
government. There were also many German commanders who offered support
against the Bolsheviks, fearing a confrontation with them was impending
as well.

During this first period, the Bolsheviks took control of Central Asia
out of the hands of the Provisional Government and White Army, setting
up a base for the Communist Party in the Steppe and Turkestan, where
nearly two million Russian settlers were located.

Most of the fighting in this first period was sporadic, involving only
small groups amid a fluid and rapidly shifting strategic scene. Among
the antagonists were the Czechoslovaks, known as the Czechoslovak Legion
or "White Czechs", the Poles of the Polish 5th Rifle Division, and the
pro-Bolshevik Red Latvian riflemen.

The second period of the war lasted from January to November 1919. At
first the White armies' advances from the south (under General Denikin),
the east (under Admiral Kolchak), and the northwest (under General
Yudenich) were successful, forcing the Red Army and its leftist allies
back on all three fronts. In July 1919, the Red Army suffered another
reverse after a mass defection of Red Army units in the Crimea to the
anarchist Black Army under Nestor Makhno, enabling anarchist forces to
consolidate power in Ukraine.

Leon Trotsky soon reformed the Red Army, concluding the first of two
military alliances with the anarchists. In June, the Red Army first
checked Kolchak's advance. After a series of engagements, assisted by a
Black Army offensive against White supply lines, the Red Army defeated
Denikin's and Yudenich's armies in October and November.

The third period of the war was the extended siege of the last White
forces in the Crimea. Wrangel had gathered the remnants of Denikin's
armies, occupying much of the Crimea. An attempted invasion of southern
Ukraine was rebuffed by the anarchist Black Army under the command of
Nestor Makhno. Pursued into the Crimea by Makhno's troops, Wrangel went
over to the defensive in the Crimea. After an abortive move north
against the Red Army, Wrangel's troops were forced south by Red Army and
Black Army forces; Wrangel and the remains of his army were evacuated to
Constantinople in November 1920.

Warfare
-------

### October Revolution

In the October Revolution, the Bolshevik Party directed the Red Guard
(armed groups of workers and Imperial army deserters) to seize control
of Petrograd (Saint Petersburg), and immediately began the armed
takeover of cities and villages throughout the former Russian Empire. In
January 1918, the Bolsheviks dissolved the Russian Constituent Assembly,
and proclaimed the Soviets (workers’ councils) as the new government of
Russia.

### Initial anti-Bolshevik uprisings

Image:Parc de datcha près Moscou 1917.jpg|thumb|Summer 1917 in Russia
near Moscow. In the park of the dacha, a German [babushka and her two
granddaughters. The children flew with their Swiss parents (probably in
1921) to Switzerland in a dramatic escape, living first in the South of
Russia (Rostov-on-Don), later fleeing through Odessa by sealed cattle
carriage to Warsaw. When the family arrived in Basel, they had to endure
an obliged quarantine.](wikt:бабушка#Russian "wikilink")

The first attempt to regain power from the Bolsheviks was made by the
Kerensky-Krasnov uprising in October 1917. It was supported by the
Junker Mutiny in Petrograd but was quickly put down by the Red Guard,
notably the Latvian rifle division.

The initial groups that fought against the Communists were local Cossack
armies that had declared their loyalty to the Provisional Government.
Kaledin of the Don Cossacks and Semenov of the Siberian Cossacks were
prominent among them. The leading Tsarist officers of the old regime
also started to resist. In November, General Alekseev, the Tsar's
Chief-of-Staff during the First World War, began to organise the
Volunteer Army in Novocherkassk. Volunteers of this small army were
mostly officers of the old Russian army, military cadets and students.
In December 1917, Alekseev was joined by Kornilov, Denikin, and other
Tsarist officers who had escaped from the jail where they had been
imprisoned following the abortive Kornilov affair just before the
Revolution. At the beginning of December 1917, groups of volunteers and
Cossacks captured Rostov.

Having stated in the November 1917 “Declaration of Rights of Nations of
Russia” that any nation under imperial Russian rule should be
immediately given the power of self-determination, the Bolsheviks had
begun to usurp the power of the Provisional Government in the
territories of Central Asia soon after the establishment of the
Turkestan Committee in Tashkent. In April 1917, the Provisional
Government set up this committee, which was mostly made up of former
tsarist officials. The Bolsheviks attempted to take control of the
Committee in Tashkent on 12 September 1917, but their mission was
unsuccessful, and many Bolshevik leaders were arrested. However, because
the Committee lacked representation of the native population and poor
Russian settlers, they had to release the Bolshevik prisoners almost
immediately due to public outcry, and a successful takeover of this
government body took place two months later in November. The success of
the Bolshevik party over the Provisional Government during 1917 was
mostly due to the support they received from the working class of
Central Asia. The Leagues of Mohammedam Working People, which Russian
settlers and natives who had been sent to work behind the lines for the
Tsarist government in 1916 formed in March 1917, had led numerous
strikes in the industrial centers throughout September 1917.

However, after the Bolshevik destruction of the Provisional Government
in Tashkent, Muslim elites formed an autonomous government in Turkestan,
commonly called the "Kokand autonomy" (or simply Kokand). The White
Russians supported this government body, which lasted several months
because of Bolshevik troop isolation from Moscow.

In January 1918 the Soviet forces under Lieutenant Colonel Muravyov
invaded Ukraine and invested Kiev, where the Central Council of the
Ukrainian People's Republic held power. With the help of the Kiev
Arsenal Uprising, the Bolsheviks captured the city on 26 January.

### Peace with the Central Powers

The Bolsheviks decided to immediately make peace with the German Empire
and the Central Powers, as they had promised the Russian people before
the Revolution. Vladimir Lenin's political enemies attributed that
decision to his sponsorship by the foreign office of Wilhelm II, German
Emperor, offered to Lenin in hope that, with a revolution, Russia would
withdraw from World War I. That suspicion was bolstered by the German
Foreign Ministry's sponsorship of Lenin's return to Petrograd. However,
after the military fiasco of the summer offensive (June 1917) by the
Russian Provisional Government, and in particular after the failed
summer offensive of the Provisional Government had devastated the
structure of the Russian Army, it became crucial that Lenin realize the
promised peace. Even before the failed summer offensive the Russian
population was very sceptical about the continuation of the war. Western
socialists had promptly arrived from France and from the UK to convince
the Russians to continue the fight but could not change the new pacifist
mood of Russia.

On 16 December 1917, an armistice was signed between Russia and the
Central Powers in Brest-Litovsk and peace talks began. As a condition
for peace, the proposed treaty by the Central Powers conceded huge
portions of the former Russian Empire to the German Empire and the
Ottoman Empire, greatly upsetting nationalists and conservatives. Leon
Trotsky, representing the Bolsheviks, refused at first to sign the
treaty while continuing to observe a unilateral cease fire, following
the policy of "No war, no peace".

In view of this, on 18 February 1918, the Germans began Operation
Faustschlag on the Eastern Front, encountering virtually no resistance
in a campaign that lasted eleven days. Signing a formal peace treaty was
the only option in the eyes of the Bolsheviks because the Russian army
was demobilized, and the newly formed Red Guard was incapable of
stopping the advance. They also understood that the impending
counterrevolutionary resistance was more dangerous than the concessions
of the treaty, which Lenin viewed as temporary in the light of
aspirations for a world revolution.

The Soviets acceded to a peace treaty, and the formal agreement, the
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, was ratified on 6 March. The Soviets viewed the
treaty as merely a necessary and expedient means to end the war.
Therefore, they ceded large amounts of territory to the German Empire.

### Ukraine, South Russia, and Caucasus 1918

Under Soviet pressure, the Volunteer Army embarked on the epic Ice March
from Yekaterinodar to Kuban on 22 February 1918, where they joined with
the Kuban Cossacks to mount an abortive assault on Yekaterinodar. The
Soviets recaptured Rostov on the next day. General Kornilov was killed
in the fighting on 13 April, and General Denikin took over the command.
Fighting off its pursuers without respite, the army succeeded in
breaking its way through back towards the Don, where the Cossack
uprising against Bolsheviks had started.

The Baku Soviet Commune was established on 13 April. Germany landed its
Caucasus Expedition troops in Poti on 8 June. The Ottoman Army of Islam
(in coalition with Azerbaijan) drove them out of Baku on 26 July 1918.
Subsequently, the Dashanaks, Right SRs and Mensheviks started
negotiations with General Dunsterville, the commander of the British
troops in Persia. The Bolsheviks and their Left SR allies were opposed
to it, but on 25 July the majority of the Soviet voted to call in the
British, and the Bolsheviks resigned. The Baku Soviet Commune ended its
existence and was replaced by the Central Caspian Dictatorship.

In June 1918, the Volunteer Army, numbering some 9,000 men, started its
second Kuban campaign. Yekaterinodar was encircled on 1 August and fell
on the 3rd. In September–October, heavy fighting took place at Armavir
and Stavropol. On 13 October, General Kazanovich's division took
Armavir, and on 1 November, general Pyotr Wrangel secured Stavropol.
This time Red forces had no escape, and by the beginning of 1919, the
whole Northern Caucasus was free from Bolsheviks.

In October, General Alekseev, the leader for the White armies in
southern Russia, died of a heart attack. An agreement was reached
between Denikin, head of the Volunteer Army, and PN Krasnov, Ataman of
the Don Cossacks, which united their forces under the sole command of
Denikin. The Armed Forces of South Russia were thus created.

### Eastern Russia and Siberia, 1918

The Revolt of the Czechoslovak Legion broke out in May 1918, and the
legionaries took control of Chelyabinsk in June. Simultaneously, Russian
officers' organisations overthrew the Bolsheviks in Petropavlovsk and in
Omsk. Within a month the Whites controlled most of the Trans-Siberian
Railroad from Lake Baikal to the Ural regions. During the summer,
Bolshevik power in Siberia was eliminated. The Provisional Government of
Autonomous Siberia formed in Omsk.

By the end of July, the Whites had extended their gains westwards,
capturing Ekaterinburg on 26 July 1918. Shortly before the fall of
Yekaterinburg on 17 July 1918, the former Tsar and his family were
executed by the Ural Soviet to prevent them falling into the hands of
the Whites.

The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries supported peasants fighting
against Soviet control of food supplies. In May 1918, with the support
of the Czechoslovak Legion, they took Samara and Saratov, establishing
the Committee of Members of the Constituent Assembly – known as the
"Komuch". By July, the authority of the Komuch extended over much of the
area controlled by the Czechoslovak Legion. The Komuch pursued an
ambivalent social policy, combining democratic and even socialist
measures, such as the institution of an eight-hour working day, with
"restorative" actions, such as returning both factories and land to
their former owners. After the fall of Kazan Vladimir Lenin called for
the dispatch of Petrograd workers to the Kazan Front: "We must send down
the *maximum* number of Petrograd workers: (1) a few dozen 'leaders'
like Kayurov; (2) a few thousand militants 'from the ranks'".

After a series of reverses at the front, War Commissar Trotsky
instituted increasingly harsh measures in order to prevent unauthorized
withdrawals, desertions, or mutinies in the Red Army. In the field, the
Cheka special investigations forces, termed the *Special Punitive
Department of the All-Russian Extraordinary Commission for Combat of
Counter-Revolution and Sabotage*, or *Special Punitive Brigades*,
followed the Red Army, conducting field tribunals and summary executions
of soldiers and officers who deserted, retreated from their positions,
or failed to display sufficient offensive zeal. Trotsky extended the use
of the death penalty to the occasional political commissar whose
detachment retreated or broke in the face of the enemy. In August,
frustrated at continued reports of Red Army troops breaking under fire,
Trotsky authorized the formation of barrier troops stationed behind
unreliable Red Army units, with orders to shoot anyone withdrawing from
the battle-line without authorisation.

In September 1918, Komuch, the Siberian Provisional Government, and
other local anti-Soviet governments met in Ufa and agreed to form a new
Provisional All-Russian Government in Omsk, headed by a Directory of
five: three Socialist-Revolutionaries (Nikolai Avksentiev, Boldyrev, and
Vladimir Zenzinov) and two Kadets, (VA Vinogradov and PV Vologodskii).

By the fall of 1918, Anti-Bolshevik White Forces in the east included
the People's Army (Komuch), the Siberian Army (of the Siberian
Provisional Government) and insurgent Cossack units of Orenburg, Ural,
Siberia, Semirechye, Baikal, Amur, and Ussuri Cossacks, nominally under
the orders of general VG Boldyrev, Commander-in-Chief, appointed by the
Ufa Directorate.

On the Volga, Colonel Kappel's White detachment captured Kazan 7 August,
but the Reds re-captured the city on 8 September 1918 following the Red
counter-offensive. On the 11th, Simbirsk fell, and on 8 October, Samara.
The Whites fell back eastwards to Ufa and Orenburg.

In Omsk, the Russian Provisional Government quickly came under the
influence of the its new War Minister, Rear-Admiral Kolchak. On 18
November, a coup d'état established Kolchak as dictator. The members of
the Directory were arrested and Kolchak proclaimed the "Supreme Ruler of
Russia".

By mid-December 1918, White armies in the east had to leave Ufa, but
they balanced this failure with a successful drive towards Perm. Perm
was taken on 24 December.

### Central Asia 1918

In February 1918 the Red Army overthrew the White Russian-supported
Kokand autonomy of Turkestan. Although this move seemed to solidify
Bolshevik power in Central Asia, more troubles soon arose for the Red
Army as the Allied Forces began to intervene. British support of the
White Army provided the greatest threat to the Red Army in Central Asia
during 1918. Great Britain sent three prominent military leaders to the
area. One was Lieutenant-Colonel Bailey, who recorded a mission to
Tashkent, from where the Bolsheviks forced him to flee. Another was
General Malleson, leading the Malleson Mission, who assisted the
Mensheviks in Ashkhabad (now the capital of Turkmenistan) with a small
Anglo-Indian force. However, he failed to gain control of Tashkent,
Bukhara, and Khiva. The third was Major-General Dunsterville, who the
Bolsheviks drove out of Central Asia only a month after his arrival in
August 1918. Despite setbacks due to British invasions during 1918, the
Bolsheviks continued to make progress in bringing the Central Asian
population under their influence. The first regional congress of the
Russian Communist Party convened in the city of Tashkent in June 1918 in
order to build support for a local Bolshevik Party. Image:Europe map
1919.jpg|thumb|London Geographical Institute’s 1919 map of Europe after
the treaties of Brest-Litovsk and Batum and before the treaties of
Tartu, Kars, and Riga

### Left SR uprising

In July, two Left SR and Cheka employees, Blyumkin and Andreyev,
assassinated the German ambassador, Count Mirbach. In Moscow Left SR
uprising was put down by the Bolsheviks, using the Cheka military
detachments. Lenin personally apologised to the Germans for the
assassination. Mass arrests of Socialist-Revolutionaries followed.

### Estonia, Latvia, and Petrograd

Estonia cleared its territory from the Red Army by January 1919. Baltic
German volunteers captured Riga from the Red Latvian Riflemen on 22 May,
but the Estonian 3rd Division Battle of Cēsis (1919)|defeated the Baltic
Germans a month later, aiding to establish the Republic of Latvia in
power.

This rendered possible another threat to the Red Army – one from General
Yudenich, who had spent the summer organizing the Northwestern Army in
Estonia with local and British support. In October 1919, he tried to
capture Petrograd in a sudden assault with a force of around 20,000 men.
The attack was well-executed, using night attacks and lightning cavalry
maneuvers to turn the flanks of the defending Red Army. Yudenich also
had six British tanks, which caused panic whenever they appeared. The
Allies gave large quantities of aid to Yudenich, who, however,
complained that he was receiving insufficient support.

By 19 October, Yudenich's troops had reached the outskirts of the city.
Some members of the Bolshevik central committee in Moscow were willing
to give up Petrograd, but Trotsky refused to accept the loss of the city
and personally organized its defenses. He declared, "It is impossible
for a little army of 15,000 ex-officers to master a working class
capital of 700,000 inhabitants." He settled on a strategy of urban
defense, proclaiming that the city would "defend itself on its own
ground" and that the White Army would be lost in a labyrinth of
fortified streets and there "meet its grave".

Trotsky armed all available workers, men and women, ordering the
transfer of military forces from Moscow. Within a few weeks the Red Army
defending Petrograd had tripled in size and outnumbered Yudenich three
to one. At this point Yudenich, short of supplies, decided to call off
the siege of the city and withdrew, repeatedly asking permission to
withdraw his army across the border to Estonia. However, units
retreating across the border were disarmed and interned by order of the
Estonian government, which had entered into peace negotiations with the
Soviet Government on 16 September and had been informed by the Soviet
authorities of their 6 November decision that, should the White Army be
allowed to retreat into Estonia, it would be pursued across the border
by the Reds. In fact the Reds attacked Estonian army positions, and
fighting continued until a ceasefire came into effect on 3 January 1920.
Following the Treaty of Tartu most of Yudenich's soldiers went into
exile.

The Finnish general Mannerheim planned a Finnish intervention to help
the Whites in Russia capture Petrograd. He did not, however, gain the
necessary support for the endeavor. Lenin considered it "completely
certain, that the slightest aid from Finland would have determined the
fate of Petrograd".

### Northern Russia 1919

The British occupied Murmansk and, alongside the Americans, seized
Arkhangelsk. With the retreat of Kolchak in Siberia, they pulled their
troops out of the cities before the winter trapped their forces in the
port.

### Siberia 1919

At the beginning of March 1919, the general offensive of the Whites on
the eastern front began. Ufa was retaken on 13 March; by mid-April, the
White Army stopped at the Glazov-Chistopol-Bugulma-Buguruslan-Sharlyk
line. Reds started their counter-offensive against Kolchak's forces at
the end of April. The Red Army, led by the capable commander
Tukhachevsky, captured Elabuga on 26 May, Sarapul on 2 June, and Izevsk
on the 7th and continued to push forward. Both sides had victories and
losses, but by the middle of summer the Red Army was larger than the
White Army and had managed to recapture territory previously lost.

Following the abortive offensive at Chelyabinsk, the White armies
withdrew beyond the Tobol. In September 1919, White offensive was
launched against the Tobol front, the last attempt to change the course
of events. But on 14 October, the Reds counterattacked and then began
the uninterrupted retreat of the Whites to the east.

On 14 November 1919, the Red Army captured Omsk. Admiral Kolchak lost
control of his government shortly after this defeat; White Army forces
in Siberia essentially ceased to exist by December. Retreat of the
eastern front by White armies lasted three months, until mid-February
1920, when the survivors, after crossing Lake Baikal, reached Chita area
and joined Ataman Semenov's forces.

### South Russia 1919

The Cossacks had been unable to organize and capitalize on their
successes at the end of 1918. By 1919 they had begun to run short of
supplies. Consequently, when the Soviet counter-offensive began in
January 1919 under the Bolshevik leader Antonov-Ovseenko, the Cossack
forces rapidly fell apart. The Red Army captured Kiev on 3 February
1919.

Denikin's military strength continued to grow in the spring of 1919.
During the several months in winter and spring of 1919, hard fighting
with doubtful outcomes took place in the Donets basin where the
attacking Bolsheviks met White forces. At the same time, Denikin's Armed
Forces of South Russia (AFSR) completed the elimination of Red forces in
the northern Caucasus and advanced towards Tsaritsyn. At the end of
April and beginning of May, the AFSR attacked on all fronts from the
Dnepr to the Volga, and by the beginning of the summer they had won
numerous battles. French forces landed in Odessa but after having done
almost no fighting, withdrew their troops on 8 April 1919. By mid-June
the Reds were chased from the Crimea and from the Odessa area. Denikin's
troops took the cities of Kharkov and Belgorod. At the same time White
troops under Wrangel's command took Tsaritsyn on 17 June 1919. On 20
June, Denikin issued his famous "Moscow directive", ordering all AFSR
units to get ready for a decisive offensive to take Moscow.

Although Great Britain had withdrawn its own troops from the theater, it
continued to give significant military aid (money, weapons, food,
ammunition, and some military advisors) to the White armies during 1919.

After the capture of Tsaritsyn, Wrangel pushed towards Saratov, but
Trotsky, seeing the danger of the union with Kolchak, against whom the
Red command was concentrating large masses of troops, repulsed his
attempts with heavy losses. When Kolchak's army in the east began to
retreat in June and July, the bulk of the Red Army, free now from any
serious danger from Siberia, was directed against Denikin.

Denikin's forces constituted a real threat and for a time threatened to
reach Moscow. The Red Army, stretched thin by fighting on all fronts,
was forced out of Kiev on 30 August. Kursk and Orel were taken. The
Cossack Don Army under the command of General Konstantin Mamontov
continued north towards Voronezh, but there Tukhachevsky's army defeated
them on 24 October. Tukhachevsky's army then turned towards yet another
threat, the rebuilt Volunteer Army of General Denikin.

The high tide of the White movement against the Soviets had been reached
in September 1919. By this time Denikin's forces were dangerously
overextended. The White front had no depth or stability: it had become a
series of patrols with occasional columns of slowly advancing troops
without reserves. Lacking ammunition, artillery, and fresh
reinforcements, Denikin's army was decisively defeated in a series of
battles in October and November 1919. The Red Army recaptured Kiev on 17
December, and the defeated Cossacks fled back towards the Black Sea.

While the White armies were being routed in the center and the east,
they had succeeded in driving Nestor Makhno's anarchist Black Army
(formally known as the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine)
out of part of southern Ukraine and the Crimea. Despite this setback,
Moscow was loath to aid Makhno and the Black Army and refused to provide
arms to anarchist forces in Ukraine.

The main body of White forces, the Volunteers and the Don Army, pulled
back towards the Don, to Rostov. The smaller body (Kiev and Odessa
troops) withdrew to Odessa and the Crimea, which it had managed to
protect from the Bolsheviks during the winter of 1919–1920.

### Central Asia 1919

By February 1919 the British government had pulled their military forces
out of Central Asia. Despite this success for the Red Army, the White
Army’s assaults in European Russia and other areas broke communication
between Moscow and Tashkent. For a time, Central Asia was completely cut
off from the Red Army forces in Siberia. Although this communication
failure weakened the Red Army, the Bolsheviks continued their efforts to
gain support for the Bolshevik Party in Central Asia by holding a second
regional conference in March. During this conference a regional bureau
of Muslim organizations of the Russian Bolshevik Party was formed. The
Bolshevik Party continued to try and gain support among the native
population by giving them the impression of better representation for
the Central Asian population and throughout the end of the year were
able to maintain harmony with the Central Asian people.

Communication difficulties with the Red Army forces in Siberia and
European Russia ceased to be a problem by mid-November 1919. Due to Red
Army success north of Central Asia, communication with Moscow was
re-established, and the Bolsheviks were able to claim victory over the
White Army in Turkestan.

### South Russia, Ukraine, and Kronstadt 1920–21

By the beginning of 1920, the main body of the Armed Forces of South
Russia was rapidly retreating towards the Don, to Rostov. Denikin hoped
to hold the crossings of the Don, rest, and reform his troops, but the
White Army was not able to hold the Don area and at the end of February
1920, started a retreat across Kuban towards Novorossiysk. Slipshod
evacuation of Novorossiysk proved to be a dark event for the White Army.
About 40,000 men were evacuated by Russian and Allied ships from
Novorossiysk to the Crimea, without horses or any heavy equipment, while
about 20,000 men were left behind and either dispersed or captured by
the Red Army.

Following the disastrous Novorossiysk evacuation, Denikin stepped down,
and the military council elected Wrangel as the new Commander-in-Chief
of the White Army. He was able to restore order with dispirited troops
and reshape an army that could fight as a regular force again. This
remained an organised force in the Crimea throughout 1920.

After Moscow's Bolshevik government signed a military and political
alliance with Nestor Makhno and the Ukrainian anarchists, the Black Army
attacked and defeated several regiments of Wrangel's troops in southern
Ukraine, forcing him to retreat before he could capture that year's
grain harvest. Stymied in his efforts to consolidate his hold, Wrangel
then attacked north in an attempt to take advantage of recent Red Army
defeats at the close of the Polish-Soviet War of 1919–1920. This
offensive was eventually halted by the Red Army, and Wrangel's troops
were forced to retreat to the Crimea in November 1920, pursued by both
the Red and Black cavalry and infantry. Wrangel and the remains of his
army were evacuated from the Crimea to Constantinople on 14 November
1920. Thus ended the struggle of Reds and Whites in Southern Russia.

After the defeat of Wrangel, the Red Army immediately repudiated its
1920 treaty of alliance with Nestor Makhno and attacked the anarchist
Black Army; the campaign to liquidate Makhno and the Ukrainian
anarchists began with an attempted assassination of Makhno by the Cheka
agents. Angered by continued repression by the Bolshevik Communist
government and its liberal use of the Cheka to put down anarchist
elements, a naval mutiny erupted at Kronstadt, followed by peasant
revolts. Red Army attacks on the anarchist forces and their sympathizers
increased in ferocity throughout 1921.

### Siberia and the Far East 1920–22

In Siberia, Admiral Kolchak's army had disintegrated. He himself gave up
command after the loss of Omsk and designated Grigory Semyonov as the
new leader of the White Army in Siberia. Not long after this, Kolchak
was arrested by the disaffected Czechoslovak Corps as he traveled
towards Irkutsk without the protection of the army and turned over to
the socialist Political Centre in Irkutsk. Six days later, this regime
was replaced by a Bolshevik-dominated Military-Revolutionary Committee.
On 6–7 February, Kolchak and his prime minister Victor Pepelyaev were
shot and their bodies thrown through the ice of the frozen Angara River,
just before the arrival of the White Army in the area.

Remnants of Kolchak's army reached Transbaikalia and joined Grigory
Semyonov's troops, forming the Far Eastern army. With the support of the
Japanese Army, it was able to hold Chita, but after withdrawal of
Japanese soldiers from Transbaikalia, Semenov's position become
untenable, and in November 1920 he was repulsed by the Red Army from
Transbaikalia and took refuge in China. The Japanese, who had plans to
annex the Amur Krai, finally pulled their troops out as the Bolshevik
forces gradually asserted control over the Russian Far East. On 25
October 1922, Vladivostok fell to the Red Army, and the Provisional
Priamur Government was extinguished.

Aftermath
---------

### Ensuing rebellion

In central Asia, Red Army troops continued to face resistance into 1923,
where *basmachi* (armed bands of Islamic guerrillas) had formed to fight
the Bolshevik takeover. The Soviets engaged non-Russian peoples in
Central Asia, like Magaza Masanchi, commander of the Dungan Cavalry
Regiment, to fight against the Basmachis. The Communist Party did not
completely dismantle this group until 1934.

General Anatoly Pepelyayev continued armed resistance in the
Ayano-Maysky District until June 1923. The regions of Kamchatka and
Northern Sakhalin remained under Japanese occupation until their treaty
with the Soviet Union in 1925, when their forces were finally withdrawn.

### Casualties

The results of the civil war were momentous. Soviet demographer Boris
Urlanis estimated total number of men killed in action in the Civil War
and Polish-Soviet war as 300,000 (125,000 in the Red Army, 175,500 White
armies and Poles) and the total number of military personnel dead from
disease (on both sides) as 450,000.

During the Red Terror, the Cheka carried out at least 250,000 summary
executions of "enemies of the people" with estimates reaching above a
million.

Some 300,000–500,000 Cossacks were killed or deported during
decossackization, out of a population of around three million. An
estimated 100,000 Jews were killed in Ukraine, mostly by the White Army.
Punitive organs of the All Great Don Cossack Host sentenced 25,000
people to death between May 1918 and January 1919. Kolchak's government
shot 25,000 people in Ekaterinburg province alone.

At the end of the Civil War, the Russian SFSR was exhausted and near
ruin. The droughts of 1920 and 1921, as well as the 1921 famine,
worsened the disaster still further. Disease had reached pandemic
proportions, with 3,000,000 dying of typhus alone in 1920. Millions more
were also killed by widespread starvation, wholesale massacres by both
sides, and pogroms against Jews in Ukraine and southern Russia. By 1922,
there were at least 7,000,000 street children in Russia as a result of
nearly 10 years of devastation from the Great War and the civil war.
Image:Refugees on flatcars.jpg|thumb|Refugees on flatcars.

Another one to two million people, known as the White émigrés, fled
Russia – many with General Wrangel, some through the Far East, others
west into the newly independent Baltic countries. These émigrés included
a large part of the educated and skilled population of Russia.

The Russian economy was devastated by the war, with factories and
bridges destroyed, cattle and raw materials pillaged, mines flooded, and
machines damaged. The industrial production value descended to one
seventh of the value of 1913, and agriculture to one third. According to
*Pravda*, "The workers of the towns and some of the villages choke in
the throes of hunger. The railways barely crawl. The houses are
crumbling. The towns are full of refuse. Epidemics spread and death
strikes – industry is ruined."

It is estimated that the total output of mines and factories in 1921 had
fallen to 20% of the pre–World War level, and many crucial items
experienced an even more drastic decline. For example, cotton production
fell to 5%, and iron to 2% of pre-war levels.

War Communism saved the Soviet government during the Civil War, but much
of the Russian economy had ground to a standstill. The peasants
responded to requisitions by refusing to till the land. By 1921,
cultivated land had shrunk to 62% of the pre-war area, and the harvest
yield was only about 37% of normal. The number of horses declined from
35 million in 1916 to 24 million in 1920, and cattle from 58 to 37
million. The exchange rate with the U.S. dollar declined from two rubles
in 1914 to 1,200 in 1920.

With the end of the war, the Communist Party no longer faced an acute
military threat to its existence and power. However, the perceived
threat of another intervention, combined with the failure of socialist
revolutions in other countries, most notably the German Revolution,
contributed to the continued militarization of Soviet society. Although
Russia experienced extremely rapid economic growth in the 1930s, the
combined effect of World War I and the Civil War left a lasting scar in
Russian society, and had permanent effects on the development of the
Soviet Union.

British historian Orlando Figes has contended that the root of the
Whites' defeat was their inability to dispel the popular image that they
were dually associated with Tsarist Russia and supportive of a Tsarist
restoration.

### Brief Timeline

October 1917 - Kerensky and his supporters flee Petrograd.

5 January 1918 - The Red Guard break up a meeting of the Constituent
Assembly on Lenin's orders.

28 January 1918 - Trotsky sets up the Red army.

March 1918 - Bolsheviks move the Russian capital to Moscow from
Petrograd for protection and better communications as it is in the
centre of their territory.

14 October 1919 - Denikins army reaches Orel 300 km from Moscow.

22 October 1919 - White forces reach the outskirts of Petrograd. Trotsky
organises a counterattack.

Early November 1919 - Western allies pull the plug on support for the
whites. Troops begin to desert.

7 February 1920 - Kerensky is executed by the Bolsheviks after being
handed over by the Czech Legion.

April 1920 - Poles are driven back into Poland by the Bolsheviks

1921 - Some groups continue to fight but the Whites are beaten.
