Rock and roll became known in the Soviet Union in the 1960s and quickly
broke free from its western roots. According to many music critics, its
"golden age" years were the 1980s (especially the era of perestroika),
when the Soviet underground rock bands could release their records
officially. The great majority of the bands perform in the Russian
language.

History
-------

### The early 1960s: Local bard music and first western influences

Prior to the late sixties, music in the Soviet Union was divided into
two groups: music published by state record company Melodiya, and
everything else. Under this second group were the bards, underground
folk singer–songwriters.

Bards such as Vladimir Vysotsky and Bulat Okudzhava were among the many
artists who created the style which is referred to as "author's song"
(*авторская песня*), mostly played on unaccompanied acoustic guitar and
characterized by a strong accent on lyrics that sometimes carried a
subversive meaning. Their music was often suppressed by the government,
and yet enjoyed massive popularity, with Vysotsky becoming a highly
popular cinema and theatre actor and an iconic figure of the times.

Meanwhile, some Western music was either being smuggled across the
border or released by Melodiya as part of what essentially was state-run
media piracy, with The Beatles taking a firm place in Soviet popular
culture, and artists such as The Rolling Stones and Deep Purple
completing a somewhat distorted picture of Western music.

The first rock bands in the Soviet Union appeared on the scene in the
early sixties in Moscow, and they were heavily influenced by The
Beatles. and The Gourishankar being its most obvious representatives.
Since 2001 a prog-music festival named InProg was held almost yearly in
Moscow. Its popularity constantly grew and in 2005 it turned from a
local festival into an international one.

The Russian instrumental rock scene with bands like EXIT project, Disen
Gage, Dvar and Kostarev Group also received more recognition at that
time.

The 2005 Live 8 concert that took place in Moscow featured mainly
Russian rock artists.

The **rockapops** phenomenon from the 1990s continued to gain popularity
in the 2000s with new bands like Zveri arriving.

Bard rock of the 2000s is represented by such act as Gollandiya, a trio
from Saint Petersburg.

Industrial rock of the 2010s is represented by such act as KanZer, a
alternative-duet from Saint Petersburg. The main example of industrial
music in Russia, is the single "Run". This genre industrial is just
starting to develop in Russia.

Characteristics
---------------

Fans of Russian Rock would frequently refer to most of the music on MTV
Russia dismissively as "popsa", a dichotomy that appeared in the '80s
when government controlled radio and TV stations would air only
politically harmless music by performers such as Philipp Kirkorov. The
lines are still quite clearly drawn, with bands such as Nogu Svelo! -
who recorded a song with pop-singer Nataliya Vetlitskaya - being an
anomaly.

In contrast to Western rock, Russian rock is often said to have less
drive; it is characterized by different rhythms, instruments and more
involved lyrics. Unconventional instruments have often been used in
addition to the standard electric guitars and drums (very often violin
and wind instruments).

Another characteristic of Russian Rock is being partly Folk rock. Very
often Russian Rock songs, especially those of the classic 80s bands,
talk about national themes and feature elements from Russian folk music.
Aquarium, DDT and Yuri Morozov could be used as examples for that.

Considering its poetic roots (Russian literature, bard music), it is not
a big surprise that lyrics play a far larger role in Russian rock than
Western rock. Vocal melody is sometimes eschewed in favor of a more
impassioned delivery (Viktor Tsoi, the lead singer of Kino, pioneered a
characteristically strained, monotonous style of singing that has been
imitated by many).

Russia has always been facing both East and West with its double-headed
Eagle on the coat-of-arms. The Eastern derivative in the Russian rock
came with soundtracks from movies like *Day Watch* that had Tamerlan's
legend of the Chalk of Destiny at its roots. Russian rock expressively
used and integrated elements from culture, as well as Western and
Eastern (especially countries of the USSR).

Yngvar Bordrewich Steinholt (University of Tromsø, Norway) has written a
PhD thesis in English that was printed by The Mass Media Music Scholars
Press titled "Rock in the Reservation" (2004) about the Leningrad Rock
Club. It also touched upon the history of rock in Russia and its
counter-cultural tendencies.

Wordplay
--------

In Russian, the original meaning of word "wikt:рок|рок" is "fate" or
"doom". The word is used almost exclusively in fiction, especially
poetry (more widely used synonym is "wikt:судьба|судьба"). These
correlates with poetic roots of Russian rock and its attention to
"serious" topics.

The wordplay is used in the song "This is Fate"  from Aria's debut
album "Mania Velichia".
