Image:Ilya Repin - Sadko - Google Art Project levels adjustment
2.jpg|thumb|250px|Many generations of Slavic artists were inspired by
their national folklore: Ilya Yefimovich Repin, *Sadko in the Underwater
Kingdom* (1876)

**Slavic mythology** is the mythological aspect of the polytheistic
religion that was practised by the Slavs before Christianisation. The
religion possesses many common traits with other religions descended
from the Proto-Indo-European religion. Old Slavic religion evolved over
more than a thousand years and some parts of it were from neolithic or
possibly even mesolithic times. The Earth was worshipped as Mat Zemlya
and there were no temples. Rituals were performed in nature.

Image:Perun idol.jpg|thumb|250px|Modern wooden statue of Perun, the god
of thunder and lightning, Ruthenia

Sources of information
----------------------

Unlike Greek, Indian or Egyptian mythology, there are no first-hand
records for the study of Slavic mythology. Despite some arguable
theories (for instance, the Book of Veles), it has not been proven that
the Slavs had any sort of writing system before the arrival of Saints
Cyril and Methodius to Slavic lands in 862. Therefore, all their
original religious beliefs and traditions were likely passed down orally
over the generations, and basically forgotten over the centuries
following their rapid conversion into Christianity (which began with the
conversion of Bulgaria in 864 and was largely complete by the late 11th
century.) Before that, sparse records of Slavic religion were mostly
written by non-Slavic Christian missionaries. Archaeological remains of
old Slavic cult images and shrines have been found, though little can be
yielded from them without legitimate knowledge of their contexts, other
than confirming existing historical records. Fragments of old
mythological beliefs and pagan festivals survive up to this day in folk
customs, songs, and stories of all the Slavic nations.

### Written sources

There are currently no known written accounts of Slavic mythology
predating the fragmentation of the Proto-Slavic people into West, East,
and South Slavs, with the possible exception of a short note in
Herodotus’ *Histories*, mentioning the tribes of Budini and Neuri in the
far north, whose men, Herodotus claims, transform themselves into wolves
for several days each year. Some researchers have interpreted this
through the Slavic folk belief in werewolves, whilst others believe that
Herodotus actually referred to ancient Slavic carnival festivals, when
groups of young men roamed the villages in masks, sometimes referred to
as *vucari* (wolf-humans). The identification of "Neuri" with
Proto-Slavs remains controversial, however.

The first authoritative reference to the Slavs and their mythology in
written history was made by the 6th century Byzantine historian
Procopius, whose *Bellum Gothicum* described the beliefs of a South
Slavic tribe that crossed the Danube heading south in just two days.
According to Procopius, these Slavs worshipped a single deity, who
crafted lightning and thunder. Though not named explicitly, it can be
deduced this is a reference to the deity known as Perun in later
historic sources, as in many Slavic languages today (Polish 'piorun' for
example). *Perun* simply means "thunder" or "lightning bolt". He also
mentions the belief in various demons and nymphs (i.e. vilas), but does
not mention any other names.

The Slavic Primary Chronicle is a major work with many valuable
references to the pagan beliefs of Eastern Slavs. The chronicle treats
the history of the early Eastern Slavic state. Even though the
manuscript was compiled at the beginning of the 12th century, it
contains references to and copies of older documents, and describes
events predating the Baptism of Kiev. Two deities, Perun and
Veles/Volos, are mentioned in the text of the early 10th century peace
treaties between pagan rulers of East Slavs and Byzantine Emperors.
Later, Nestor the Chronicler describes a state pantheon introduced by
Prince Vladimir in Kiev in 980 CE. Vladimir's pantheon included Perun,
Hors, Dažbog, Stribog, Simargl, and Mokosh. The Hypatian Codex of the
Primary Chronicle also mentions Svarog, compared to Greek Hephaestus.
Also very interesting are the passages in the East Slavic epic The Tale
of Igor's Campaign referring to Veles, Dažbog, and Hors. The original
epic has been dated to the end of the 12th century, although there are
marginal disputes over the authenticity of this work.

The most numerous and richest written records are of West Slavic
paganism, particularly of Wendish and Polabian tribes, who were forcibly
made Christian only at the end of the 12th century. The German
missionaries and priests who criticized pagan religion left extensive
records of old mythological systems they sought to overcome. However,
they hardly restrained themselves from “pious lies”, claiming pagan
Slavs were idolatrous, blood-thirsty barbarians. As none of those
missionaries learned any Slavic language, their records are confused and
exaggerated.

Major works include a chronicle of Thietmar of Merseburg from the
beginning of the 11th century, who described a temple in the city of
*Riedegost* (Radegast) where the great deity *Zuarasic* (Svarožič) was
worshipped. According to Thietmar, this was the most sacred place in the
land of pagan Slavs, and Svarožič was their most important deity.

Another very valuable document is the Chronica Slavorum written in the
late 12th century by Helmold, a German priest. He mentions 'the devil'
*Zerneboh* (Chernobog), goddess Živa (goddess)|Živa, god Porenut, some
unnamed gods whose statues had multiple heads and, finally, the great
god Svantevit, worshiped on the island of Rügen who, according to
Helmold, was the most important of all (Western) Slavic deities.

Image:Saxo horn old.jpg|thumb|right|upright|Artistic representation of
Saxo Grammaticus The third, and arguably the most important, record
comes from the Danish chronicler Saxo Grammaticus, who in his Gesta
Danorum described the war fought in 1168 by the Danish king Valdemar I
against the Wends of Rügen, the conquest of their city at cape Arkona
and the destruction of the grand temple of Svantevit that stood there.
Saxo meticulously described the worship of Svantevit, the customs
associated with it and the tall four-headed statue of the god. He also
mentioned multi-headed deities of other Slavic tribes; Rugievit, Porewit
and Porentius.

The fourth major source is three biographies of the German
warrior-bishop St Otto, who in the early 12th century led several
military-pastoral expeditions into the regions of Slavic tribes living
near the Baltic Sea. According to the manuscript, the most important
Slavic deity was Triglav, whose temples in the city of Szczecin were
respected oracles. In the cities of Wolgast and Havelberg, the war god
Gerovit was worshiped, a likely corruption of Jarovit, a Slavic deity
possibly identical to Jarilo of the East Slavic folklore.

Though considered authentic by some Slavic neopagans, the Book of Veles
appears to be a forgery from the first half of the twentieth century.

### Archaeological remains

Image:Swiatowit3011.jpg|thumb|upright|The Zbruch Idol

Statues of several Slavic deities were discovered in 1848. On the banks
of the Zbruch river, a tall stone statue was found, with four faces
under a single stone hat. Because of its similarity to Saxo's
description of the great image in the temple of Rügen, the statue was
immediately proclaimed a representation of Svantevit, although it was
clear it could not be the original Svantevit of Rügen. Several other
multi-headed statues were discovered elsewhere. A tiny four-headed
statue from the 10th century, carved out of bone, was unearthed amongst
the ruins of Preslav, a capital of medieval Bulgarian tsars. A
two-headed, human-sized wooden statue was discovered on an island in the
Tollensesee lake near Neubrandenburg: in the Middle Ages, this was the
land of the Slavic Dolenain tribe, whose name survives in the name of
the lake. Furthermore, a three-headed statue was discovered in Dalmatia
(Croatia) on the hill bearing the name of Suvid, not far from the peak
of Mt. Dinara called Troglav.

The remains of several Slavic shrines have also been discovered. Some
archeological excavations on the cape of Rügen|Arkona on Rügen island
have uncovered vestiges of a great temple and a city, identified with
those described by Saxo. In Novgorod, at the ancient Peryn skete,
archeologists discovered the remains of a pagan shrine likely dedicated
to Perun. The shrine consisted of a wide circular platform centred
around a statue. The platform was encircled by a trench with eight
apses, which contain remains of sacrificial altars. Remains of a citadel
with a more or less identical layout were discovered on a location with
the suggestive name *Pohansko* (Paganic), near Břeclav in the Czech
Republic.

All these archeological remains have the multiplicity of aspects in
common. Statues of gods with multiple faces and remains of shrines with
multiple sacrificial altars confirm written reports of Christian
missionaries about the Slavs worshipping polycephalic gods, and also
indicate that ancient Slavic mythology apparently put great emphasis on
worship of deities with more aspects than one.

Also quite important are remains of several pieces of pottery from 4th
century Chernyakhov culture. Russian archeologist Boris Rybakov
identified and interpreted symbols inscribed onto them as records of the
ancient Slavic calendar.

It is commonly claimed that worshiping among Slavic people often
happened in the woods rather than in shrines. Such woods were called
"gaje" in the Proto-Slavic language (compare Polish *gaj* 'small wood,
thicket, bush, grove'; see: sacred grove), and were sometimes encircled
by a fence which created a sacred area, both a natural and social
sphere. Sometimes they would be used as cemeteries as well (see
Kleczanów Wood).

### Folklore traces

Image:Vasnetsov Frog Princess.jpg|thumb|280px|The Indo-European custom
of communal feasts was known as *bratchina* (from brat, "brother") in
Kievan Rus', as *slava* ("glorification") in Serbia & Macedonia and as
*sabor* ("assembly") in Croatia, Bosnia and Bulgaria.

As various Slavic populations were Christianised between the 7th and
12th centuries, Christianity was introduced as a religion of the elite,
flourishing mostly in cities and amongst the nobility. Amongst the rural
majority of the medieval Slavic population, old myths remained strong.
Christian priests and monks in Slavic countries, particularly in Russia,
for centuries fought against the phenomenon called *dvoeverie* (double
faith). On the one hand, peasants and farmers eagerly accepted baptism,
masses and the new Christian holidays. On the other hand, they still
persisted performing ancient rites and worshiping old pagan cults, even
when the ancient deities and myths on which those were based were
forgotten.

This was because, from a perspective of the Slavic peasant, Christianity
was not a replacement of old Slavic mythology, but rather an addition to
it. Christianity may have offered a hope of salvation, and of blissful
afterlife in the next world, but for survival in this world, for yearly
harvest and protection of cattle, the old religious system with its
fertility rites, its protective deities, and its household spirits was
taken to be necessary. This was a problem the Christian church never
really solved; at best, it could offer a Christian saint or martyr to
replace the pagan deity of a pre-Indo-European matrilineal cult, but the
cult itself thrived, as did the mythological view of the world through
which natural phenomena were explained.

While folk beliefs and traditions of all Slavic peoples indeed are the
richest resource for reconstructing the ancient pagan beliefs, these may
very likely have lost their original mythology and sanctity. People
entertained a vague idea that some festivals must be celebrated in a
certain way, some stories must be told or some songs must be sung,
merely in accordance with tradition. Cults of old deities were mixed
with worship of new Christian saints, and old rituals blended among new
Christian holidays. Image:Gamaun.jpg|thumb|180px|Gamayun, one of three
prophetic birds of Russian folklore, as painted by Viktor Vasnetsov
(1897)

This led scholars to analyse the structure of folklore itself, and to
devise methodologies through which they could reconstruct the lost
mythology from this structure. We can roughly divide the folklore
accounts into two groups:

-   Fairy tales about various fantastical characters and creatures such
    as Alkonost, Baba Yaga, Koschei the Deathless, Firebird, Zmey, songs
    and tales of legendary heroes such as Russian bogatyrs, and
    superstitions about various demons and spirits such as domovoi,
    likho, vilas, vampires, vodyanoy, rusalkas, etc. Many of these tales
    and beliefs may be quite ancient, and probably contain at least some
    elements of old mythical structure, but they are not myths
    themselves. They lack a deeper, sacral meaning and religious
    significance, and furthermore they tend to vary greatly among
    various Slavic populations.

-   Folk celebrations of various Christian festivals and popular beliefs
    in various saints. It is, for instance, quite clear that a popular
    saint in many Slavic countries, St Elijah the Thunderer, is a
    replacement of old thunder-god Perun. Likewise, traces of ancient
    deities can also be found in cults of many other saints, such as St
    Mary, St Vitus, St George, St Blaise and St Nicholas, and it is also
    obvious that various folk celebrations, such as the spring feast of
    Jare or Jurjevo and the summer feast of Ivanje or Ivan Kupala, both
    very loosely associated with Christian holidays, are abundant with
    pre-Christian elements. These beliefs have considerable religious
    and sacral significance to the people still performing them. The
    problem is, of course, that the elements of pre-Christian religion
    are hopelessly mixed into popular Christianity.

Reconstruction of original Slavic myths is thus true detective work,
requiring a considerable knowledge of various scientific disciplines
such as semiotics, linguistics, philology, comparative mythology and
ethnology. Folklore accounts must be analysed on level of structure, not
merely as songs or stories, but as groups of signs and symbols which
contain some internal structural logic. Each of these signs is composed
of some key words, which are more than simply names of characters,
places or artifacts. One important aspect of symbols is that they are
almost impossible to change; while their names may be altered, their
structure may not. Changing or losing of key words would result in a
change of symbol, which would then invalidate the internal structural
logic of a text and render the entire tale meaningless. It would then
soon be forgotten, because the pattern, or logic, through which it was
transmitted over generations would be lost.

For example: as already stated, the Slavic god of thunder, Perun, was
mostly equated with St Elijah the Thunderer in Christian folklore. But
he was also sometimes equated with St Michael, and sometimes even with
the Christian god, whilst in some Russian or Belarusian folk stories, he
was downgraded to various fairy characters such as Tsar Ogin (Tsar
Flame) or Grom (Thunder). Notwithstanding changes in the name itself,
there are always some key words present which were used to describe
Perun as a symbol in ancient mythical texts, and have survived through
folklore. Perun is always *gore* (up, above, high, on the top of the
mountain or in heaven; Perun is a heavenly god, and he is also the
'highest' deity of old Slavic pantheon), he is *suh* (dry, as opposite
of wet; he is god of thunder and lightning, which causes fire), he
*treska/razbija/goni/ubija* (strikes/sunders/pursues/kills; he is a god
of thunder and storms, destructive and furious) with
*strela/kamen/molnija* (arrow/stone/lightning; Perun's weapons, are of
course, his bolts of lightning. He fires them as arrows which are so
powerful they explode and blow up stones when they hit them). These key
words are always preserved in folklore traces, even if the true name of
Perun has been long since forgotten. Consequently, the structure of this
symbol allowed the identification of Perun with similar characters
either from Christian religion or from later folklore, which share these
similarities in the structure of their own symbols.

Following similar methodology, and drawing parallels with the structure
of other, related Indo-European mythologies (particularly Baltic
mythology), and occasionally using some hints found in historical
records of Slavic paganism, some of the ancient myths could be
reconstructed. Significant progress in the study of Slavic mythology was
made during the last 30 years, mostly through the work of the Russian
philologists Vladimir Toporov and Vyacheslav Vsevolodovich Ivanov, as
well as that of the Croatian scientists Radoslav Katičić and :hr:Vitomir
Belaj|Vitomir Belaj. Also very valuable are the studies of Russian
scholar Boris Uspensky and of Serbian philologist and ethnologist
Veselin Čajkanović.

However, uncritical interpretation of folklore or unskilled
reconstruction of myths can lead to disastrous effects, as explained
below.

### Inauthentic sources

Image:New granite sculpture of Radegast.jpg|thumb|Statue of "Radegast"
by Czech-American Sculptor Albin Polasek, Czech Beskids

When dealing with Slavic mythology, one cannot be too careful or too
critical about the validity and authenticity of sources. Scholarly
interest in beliefs of ancient Slavs has been continually waxing since
the times of Renaissance, and with it the overall number of confusions,
errors, misinterpretations, and unsupported reconstructions (not to
mention inventions) has also increased.

No valid scientific methodology by which folklore accounts could be
interpreted was known before the mid-20th century, and with sparse
historical and archeological sources, the doors were thus opened to wild
and unwarranted speculation. One of the best examples of overall
confusion and complete misinterpretation is a fake deity of love, Lada
or Lado, constructed from meaningless exclamations in Slavic wedding
songs. Gods such as Koleda and Kupala were constructed from
misinterpreted names of popular Slavic folk festivals; Koledo was the
Slavic name for Christmas processions of carol singers, whilst the
source of the name Kupala is from *kupati* meaning "to bathe". Christian
sources claim that it comes from Ivan Kupala (literally: John the
Baptist) however this claim is as baseless as the claim of those who
choose to interpret it as a pagan holiday. This festival day is
celebrated at the summer solstice in many Slavic, and also western
European countries, such as France and Italy. These customs indeed do
have more than a few elements of pre-Christian beliefs, but simply
inventing gods based on names of customs is not considered a valid
method for reconstruction of lost beliefs.

Image:Firebird.jpg|thumb|In his early works, notably *The Firebird* and
*The Rite of Spring*, Igor Stravinsky sought to evoke the imagery and
rhythms of pagan Slavic ritual. Misinterpretation of Thiethmar's
historic description of Wendish paganism led to confusion between a god,
Svarožič, and the city in which his temple stood, Radegast. Since the
name Radegast can be easily etymologised as meaning "Dear guest", this
led to the construction of Radegast as the supposed Slavic god of
hospitality and sun. Likewise, to pair up with a deity with the sinister
sounding name of Chernobog (Black god) mentioned by Helmod, the White
God, or Belobog, was invented. That name is not found in any reliable
historic or ethnographic record; rather, it was simply assumed that,
since there already was a Black God, there simply had to be a White God
as well. Again, this is clearly not a scientific approach to the study
of Slavic mythology, but pages and pages have been written about the
supposed Belobog-Chernobog dualism so far, and many books and scholarly
references even today take for granted that such gods were truly
worshipped by ancient Slavs.

Even more questionable than confusions or misinterpretations are
deliberate forgeries. In the nineteenth and twentieth century, the
general population became increasingly interested in Slavic mythology,
fuelled by various romantic, nationalistic, and, in modern times,
neopagan movements. Forging evidence of ancient mythology, for a time,
became almost a sort of hobby among various social groups, often with
the aim to promote their own topical agendas. For instance, statues of
ancient Slavic gods were "discovered", inscribed with Germanic runes, or
folk songs and stories were "recorded" in which half of the Slavic
pantheon is described as picking flowers or merrily dancing around a
bonfire.

The 19th century Veda Slovena is a heavy mystification of Bulgarian folk
songs, with many alleged references to Slavic mythology, which most
scholars consider a forgery. A more recent example is the controversial
Book of Veles, which claims to be an authentic written record of old
Slavic religion from the 9th or 10th century CE, written in Cyrillic,
whereas it cannot be proven that the Slavs had any sort of writing
system before Christianisation, let alone that they used the Cyrillic
alphabet (named, of course, after St Cyril, who coined the first known
writing system for Slavs when he was sent together with his brother
Methodius to baptise them in the 9th century on the request of Prince
Rastislav the ruler of Great Moravia ). Some of the Slavic neopagans use
the Book of Veles as their sacred text, and consequently, insist that
the document is authentic. However, the original book, supposedly
written on birch barks, was lost (if indeed it ever existed), and thus
its authenticity cannot be established at present.

Calendar and festivals
----------------------

Slavic myths were cyclical, repeating every year over a series of
festivities that followed changes of nature and seasons. Thus, to
understand their mythology, it is important to understand their concept
of calendar. On the basis of archeological and folklore remains, it is
possible to reconstruct some elements of the pre-Christian calendar,
particularly major festivals.

-   The year was apparently lunar and began in early March, similar to
    other Indo-European cultures whose old calendar systems are better
    known to us. The names for the last night of the old year and the
    first day of the new year are reconstructed as *Velja Noc (\*Velja
    Notj)/Velik Dan (Velikŭ dĭnĭ)* (Great Night/Great Day). After
    Christianization, these names were probably passed onto Easter. In
    Slavic countries belonging to Orthodox Churches, Easter is known as
    Velik Dan/Great Day, whilst amongst Catholic Slavs, it is known as
    Velika Noc/Great Night. The names blend nicely with the translation
    of the Greek *Megale Evthomada*, Great Week, the Christian term for
    the week in which Easter falls. In pagan times, however, this was a
    holiday probably quite like Halloween. Certain people (shamans)
    donned grotesque masks and coats of sheep wool, roaming around the
    villages, as during the Great Night, it was believed, spirits of
    dead ancestors travelled across the land, entering villages and
    houses to celebrate the new year with their living relatives.
    Consequently, the deity of the last day of the year was probably
    Veles, god of the Underworld.

Image:Au maslenitsa.JPG|thumb|220px|The spring fertility festival of
Maslenitsa, rooted in pagan times and involving the burning of a straw
effigy is still celebrated by Slavs all over the world, as seen here in
Melbourne, Australia.

-   There was a large spring festival dedicated to Jarilo, god of
    vegetation and fertility. Processions of young men or girls used to
    go round villages on this day, carrying green branches or flowers as
    symbols of new life. They would travel from home to home, reciting
    certain songs and bless each household with traditional fertility
    rites. The leader of the procession, usually riding on a horse,
    would be identified with Jarilo. The custom of creating pysanki or
    decorated eggs, also symbols of new life, was another tradition
    associated with this feast, which was later passed on to Christian
    Easter.

-   The summer solstice festival is known today variously as Pust,
    Ivanje, Kupala or Kries. It was celebrated pretty much as a huge
    wedding, and, according to some indications from historical sources,
    in pagan times likely followed by a general orgy. There was a lot of
    eating and drinking on the night before, large bonfires (in Slavic —
    *Kres*) were lit, and youngsters were coupling and dancing in
    circles, or jumped across fires. Young girls made wreaths from
    flowers and fern (which apparently was a sacred plant for this
    celebration), tossed them into rivers, and on the basis of how and
    where they floated, foretold each other how they would get married.
    Ritual bathing on this night was also very important; hence the name
    of *Kupala* (from *kupati* = to bathe), which probably fit nicely
    with the folk translation of the future patron saint the Church
    installed for this festival, John the Baptist (Ivan Kupala Day).
    Overall, the whole festivity probably celebrated a divine wedding of
    a fertility god, associated with the growth of plants for
    harvesting.

-   In the middle of summer, there was a festival associated with
    thunder-god Perun, in post-Christian times transformed into a very
    important festival of Saint Elijah. It was considered the holiest
    time of the year, and there are some indications from historic
    sources that it involved human sacrifices (See Human Sacrifices of
    the Slavic People). The harvest probably began afterwards. However,
    this theory of a blood sacrifice of the Slavic people is claimed to
    have been debunked by Волхва Богумила Мурина (Volhv Bogumil Murin)
    in his 2011 book, 'Кровавые жертвоприношения у славян: Разоблачение
    мифа' (Bloody Sacrifices of the Slavs: Debunking the Myth)

-   It is unclear when exactly the end of harvest was celebrated, but
    historic records mention an interesting tradition associated with it
    that was celebrated at the Svantevit temple on the island of Ruyana
    (present-day Rugen), and survived through later folklore. People
    would gather in front of the temple, where priests would place a
    huge wheat cake, almost the size of a human. The high priest would
    stand behind the cake and ask the masses if they saw him. Whatever
    their answer was, the priest would then plead that the next year,
    people could not see him behind the ritual cake, i.e. that the next
    year's harvest would be even more bountiful.

-   There was probably also an important festival around winter
    solstice, which later became associated with Christmas.
    Consequently, in many Slavic countries, Christmas is called
    *Bozhich*, which simply means *little god*. While this name fits
    very nicely with the Christian idea of Christmas, the name is likely
    of pagan origin; it indicated the birth of a young and new god of
    the sun to the old and weakened solar deity during the longest night
    of the year. The old sun god was identified as Svarog, and his son,
    the young and new sun, as Dažbog. An alternative (or perhaps the
    original) name for this festival was Korochun or Koleda.

-   The Serbian tradition of "Badnja Vece" on Christmas Eve can also
    provide hints into pre-Christian Slavic rituals. In this ceremony,
    oak branches are collected, and each is adorned with ribbons. A
    priest will "bless" the branches with water, wheat (or barley) and
    perhaps walnuts. Interestingly, the infant Jesus is not mentioned in
    the service. At the conclusion of the ceremony, an oak log is set
    ablaze.

Cosmology
---------

Image:Polony2009.jpg|thumb|250px|Wooden copy of the Zbruch Idol

A fairly typical cosmological concept among speakers of Indo-European
languages, that of the World Tree, is also present in Slavic mythology.
It is either an oak tree, or some sort of pine tree. The mythological
symbol of the World Tree was a very strong one, and survived throughout
the Slavic folklore for many centuries after Christianisation. Three
levels of the universe were located on the tree. Its crown represented
the sky, the realm of heavenly deities and celestial bodies, whilst the
trunk was the realm of mortals. They were sometimes combined together in
opposition to the roots of the tree, which represented the underworld,
the realm of the dead.

The pattern of three realms situated vertically on the axis mundi of the
World Tree parallels the horizontal, geographical organization of the
world. The world of gods and mortals was situated in the center of the
earth, encircled by a sea, across which lay the land of the dead, to
where birds would fly every winter and return from in spring. In many
folkloric accounts, the concepts of *going across the sea* (idit) versus
*coming from across the sea* (dolazit) are equated with dying versus
returning to life. This echoes an ancient mythological concept that the
afterlife is reached by crossing over a body of water. Additionally, on
the horizontal axis, the world was also split; in this case by four
cardinal points, representing the four wind directions (north, east,
south, west). These two divisions of the world, into three realms on the
vertical axis and into four points on the horizontal, were quite
important in mythology; they can be interpreted in statues of Slavic
gods, particularly those of the three-headed Triglav and the four-headed
Svantevit.

Pantheon
--------

As noted in the description of historical sources, a very wide range of
deities were worshipped by Slavs, on a huge geographical area from the
shores of the Baltic to the shores of the White Sea, in a time span of
over 600 years. Historic sources also show that each Slavic tribe
worshipped its own gods, and thus probably had its own pantheon.
Overall, ancient Slavic religion seems to be fairly local and cultic in
nature, with gods and beliefs varying from tribe to tribe. However, just
as in the case of the various Slavic languages — it can be shown that
they originate from a single, Proto-Slavic language — it is also
possible to establish some sort of Proto-Slavic Olympus and, through
careful study of folklore, reconstruct some elements of this original
pantheon, from which the various gods of the various Slavic tribes
originated.

### Supreme god

There are various modern theories about the supreme Slavic deity being
Rod or Svarog, and historic sources show that deities such as Svarožič,
Svantevit or Triglav were worshipped as supreme by certain tribes. But
overall, the best candidate for the position of supreme deity is by far
Perun. His name is the most common in all historic records of Slavic
religion; in fact, he is the first Slavic god mentioned in written
history (Procopius in his short note mentions that the god of thunder
and lightning is the only god of Slavs, lord of all). The Primary
Chronicle identifies him as chief god of Kievan Rus before
Christianisation. A short note in Helmold's Chronica Slavorum states
that West Slavs believe in a single deity in heaven who rules over all
the other deities on earth; the name of this deity is not mentioned, but
nevertheless it seems quite possible this was a reference to Perun. And
even though we do not find the name of Perun in any of the extensive
records of West Slavic religion, he was known by all branches of Slavs,
as shown by a vast number of toponyms that still bear his name in all
Slavic countries today. Finally, by analysing the folklore texts, one
will notice that Perun is the only Slavic deity who was equated with the
Christian god. These are very strong indications that Perun was indeed
the supreme god of the original Proto-Slavic pantheon.

Perun, however, had a match. As Roman Jakobson pointed out, whenever
Perun is mentioned in historic texts, he is always "accompanied" by
another god, Veles. This relationship can be observed in toponyms as
well. Wherever we find a hill or a mountain peak whose name can be
associated with Perun, below it, in the lowlands, usually near a river,
there will be a place with a name reminiscent of Veles. Consequently, as
Perun was sometimes identified with the Сhristian God in folklore
accounts, Veles was identified with the Devil.

### Deities

#### Perun and Veles

Image:Thundermarks.svg|right|thumb|*Gromoviti znaci* or thunder marks
such as these were often engraved upon roof beams of houses to protect
them from lightning bolts. Identical symbols were discovered on
Proto-Slavic pottery of 4th century Chernyakhov culture. They are
thought to be symbols of the Slavic god of thunder Perun.

Ivanov and Toporov reconstructed the ancient myth involving the two
major gods of the Proto-Slavic pantheon, Perun and Veles. The two of
them stand in opposition in almost every way. Perun is a heavenly god of
thunder and lightning, fiery and *dry*, who rules the living world from
his citadel high *above*, located on the top of the highest branch of
the World Tree. Veles is a chthonic god associated with waters, earthly
and *wet*, lord of the underworld, who rules the realm of the dead from
*down* in the roots of the World Tree. Perun is a giver of rain to
farmers, god of war and weapons, invoked by fighters. Veles is a god of
cattle, protector of shepherds, associated with magic and commerce.

Many places in various Slavic countries still carry the God's name:
Perun (the famous mountain in Bosnia Herzegovina, Vareš), Perunac,
Perunovac, Perunika, Perunička Glava, Peruni Vrh, Perunja Ves, Peruna
Dubrava, Perunuša, Perušice, Perudina and Perutovac. These names today
mostly represent mountain tops, but in medieval times, large oaks,
sacred groves and even entire villages or citadels were named Perun.
Also, as mentioned already, in Ukrainian perun and in Polish piorun
means "thunderbolt". Among South Slavs, a mountain plant Iris germanica
is known in folklore as perunika ("Perun's plant") and sometimes also as
bogisha, ("god's plant"), and was believed to grow from ground that had
been struck by lightning.

A cosmic battle fought between the two of them echoes the ancient
Indo-European myth of a fight between a storm god and a dragon.
Attacking with his lightning bolts from the sky, Perun pursues his
serpentine enemy Veles, who slithers down over the earth. Veles taunts
Perun and flees, transforming himself into various animals, hiding
behind trees, houses, or people. In the end, Perun catches up with the
dog Veles turned into and eventually befriends him using kind words and
bits of meat, only to then grab the dog and throw him into a lake, where
Veles drowns. Perun does not actually destroy Veles, but simply returns
him to his place in the world of the dead. Thus the order of the world,
disrupted by Veles's mischief, is established once again by Perun. The
idea that storms and thunder are actually a divine battle between the
supreme god and his arch-enemy was extremely important to Slavs, and
continued to thrive long after Perun and Veles were replaced by the
Сhristian God and Devil. A lightning bolt striking down a tree or
burning down a peasant's house was always explained through the belief
of a raging heavenly deity bashing down on his earthly, underworldly,
enemy.

The enmity of the two gods was explained by Veles' theft of Perun's
cattle, or by Perun's theft of Veles' cattle (since Veles was the god of
cattle, the matter of ownership here is not clear). The motif of
stealing divine cattle is also a common one in Indo-European mythology;
the cattle in fact may be understood simply as a metaphor for heavenly
water or rain. Thus, Veles steals rain water from Perun, or Perun steals
water for rain from Veles (again, since Veles is associated with waters,
and Perun with sky and clouds, it is unclear to whom rain should
belong). An additional reason for this enmity may be wife-theft. From
folklore accounts it seems that the Sun was sometimes considered to be
Perun's wife (an odd idea, as all Slavic sun-gods, like Hors and Dažbog,
are male). However, since the Sun, in the mythic view of the world, dies
every evening, as it descends beyond the horizon and into the underworld
where it spends the night, this was understood by Slavs as Veles' theft
of Perun's wife (but again, the rebirth of the Sun in the morning could
also be understood as Perun's theft of Veles' wife).

Image:Marzanna03.jpg|thumb|250px|The burning of Marzanna at spring
equinox is one of the remains of pre-Christian beliefs in today's Polish
culture.

#### Jarilo and Morana

Katicic and Belaj continued down the path laid by Ivanov and Toporov and
reconstructed the myth revolving around the fertility and vegetation
god. Jarilo is god of the vegetation and spring, and his sister and
wife, Morena (Marzanna), goddess of winter and death. Jarilo is
associated with the Moon and Morena is considered a daughter of the Sun.
Both of them are children of Perun, born on the night of the new year
(Great Night). However, on the same night, Jarilo is snatched from the
cradle and taken to the underworld, where Veles raises him as his own.
At the Spring festival of Jare/Jurjevo, Jarilo returns from the world of
the dead (*from across the sea*), bringing spring from the ever-green
underworld into the realm of the living. He meets his sister Morana and
courts her. At the beginning of summer, the festival later known as
Ivanje/Ivan Kupala celebrated their divine wedding. The sacred union
between brother and sister, children of the supreme god, brings
fertility and abundance to earth, ensuring a bountiful harvest. Also,
since Jarilo is the (step)son of Veles, and his wife the daughter of
Perun, their marriage brings peace between two great gods; in other
words, it ensures there will be no storms which could damage the
harvest.

After the harvest, however, Jarilo is unfaitfhul to his wife, and she
vengefully slays him (returns him into the underworld), renewing the
enmity between Perun and Veles. Without her husband, god of fertility
and vegetation, Morana — and all of nature with her — withers and
freezes in the upcoming winter; she turns into a terrible, old, and
dangerous goddess of darkness and frost, and eventually dies by the end
of the year. The whole myth would repeat itself anew each following
year, and retelling of its key parts was accompanied by the major yearly
festivals of the Slavic calendar. The story also shows numerous
parallels to similar myths of Baltic and Hittite mythology.

#### Svarog, Svarožič, Dažbog

Image:Idoly.jpg|thumb|Nicholas Roerich, *Slavic Idols* (1901) The name
of Svarog is found only in East Slavic manuscripts, where it is usually
equated with the Greek smith god Hephaestus. However, the name is very
ancient, indicating that Svarog was a deity of the Proto-Slavic
pantheon. The root *svar* means bright, clear, and the suffix *-og*
denotes a place. Comparison with Vedic Svarga indicates that Svarog
simply meant (daylight) sky. It is possible he was the original sky god
of the pantheon, perhaps a Slavic version of Proto-Indo-European
*\*Dyēus Ph~2~ter*. Svarog can be also understood as meaning a shining,
fiery place; a forge. This, and identification with Hephaestus from
historic sources, indicates he was also a god of fire and blacksmithing.
According to the interpretation by Ivanov and Toporov, Svarog had two
sons: Svarožič, who represented fire on earth, and Dažbog, who
represented fire in the sky and was associated with the Sun. Svarog was
believed to have forged the Sun and have given it to his son Dažbog to
carry it across the sky.

In Russian manuscripts he is equated with the Sun, and folklore
remembers him as a benevolent deity of light and sky. Serbian folklore,
however, presents a far darker picture of him; he is remembered as
Dabog, a frightful and lame deity guarding the doors of the underworld,
associated with mining and precious metals. Veselin Čajkanović pointed
out that these two aspects fit quite nicely into the symbolism of the
Slavic solar deity; a benevolent side represents Dažbog during the day,
when he carries the Sun across the sky. The malevolent and ugly Dabog
carries the Sun through the underworld at night. This pattern can also
be applied to the Sun's yearly cycle; a benevolent aspect is associated
with the young summer Sun, and a malevolent one with the old winter Sun.

Svarožič was worshipped as a fire spirit by Russian peasants well after
Christianisation. He was also known amongst Western Slavs, but there he
was worshipped as a supreme deity in the holy city of Radegast. Svarožič
is simply a diminutive of Svarog's name, and thus it may simply be
another aspect (a surname, so to speak) of Dažbog. There is also the
point of view that Svarog was the ancestor of all other Slavic gods, and
thus Svarožič could simply be an epithet of any other deity, so that
Dažbog, Perun, Veles, and so on, were possibly all Svarožičs.

#### Svantevit and Triglav

![Artistic depiction of Svantevit at Kap Arkona,
Rügen](Svantevit-Statue.jpg "Artistic depiction of Svantevit at Kap Arkona, Rügen")

It is somewhat ironic that the position of these two in the Proto-Slavic
pantheon is unclear, yet the historic accounts written about them are
the most extensive. That they were important to all pagan Slavs is
indicated by a significant number of toponyms whose names can be
associated with them and by discoveries of multi-headed statues in
various Slavic lands. Both of these gods were considered supreme in
various locations; they were associated with divination and symbolized
by the horse. A possibly significant difference is that Svantevit had a
white horse whilst Triglav had a black one, and Svantevit was
represented with four heads whilst Triglav (whose name simply means
*three-headed*) with three. Svantevit was also associated with victory
in war, harvest, and commerce.

Various hypotheses about them were proposed: that they are in fact one
and the same deity, being somewhat similar; that they are not gods at
all but compounds of three or four gods, a kind of mini-pantheons.
Slavic neopagans tend to think of Triglav in particular as a concept of
Trinity. Svantevit has also been proclaimed as a late West Slavic
alternation of Perun or Jarilo, or compared with Svarožič and deemed a
solar deity. None of these hypotheses is quite satisfactory, and mostly
they are just wild speculation, another attempt to reconstruct Slavic
mythology as it should be, rather than discovering what it really was
like. Further research is necessary before more can be said of these
deities.

It is claimed that Slovenia's highest mountain, Triglav, is named after
the god Triglav.

#### Zorica and Danica

These names mean simply Dawn and Daystar, but in folklore accounts of
all Slavic nations, they are often described as persons, or associated
with persons, in pretty much the same way as Sun and Moon. Danica is
often called Sun's younger sister or daughter, and was probably
associated with Morana. Consequently, Zorica was either Sun's mother or
older sister. It is quite possible this was a Slavic relic of the
Proto-Indo-European dawn god.

### Further developments

Ivanov and Toporov also schematically periodised various stages of
development of Slavic mythology, attempting to show how it evolved from
the original pantheon:

-   The first subsequent development occurred after the Proto-Slavs had
    split into East, West, and South Slavs. Each branch of the Slavic
    family devised various feminine deities of household (e.g. Mokosh),
    and deities associated with crafts, agriculture, and fertility (e.g.
    Rod and Chur). Deities such as Hors and Simargl are sometimes
    interpreted as the East Slavic borrowings from their Iranian
    neighbours.

-   At the level of abstract personification of divine functions, we
    have such concepts as **Pravda**/**Krivda** (Right/Wrong), **Dobra
    Kob**/**Zla Kob** (Good Fortune/Evil Fortune). These concepts, found
    in many Slavic fairy tales, are presumed to have originated at a
    time when old myths were already being downgraded to the level of
    legends and stories. Loius Leger pointed out that various Slavic
    words describing success, destiny, or fortune are all connected with
    the ancient Slavic word for God — "bog". Although used to denote the
    god of Christianity, the word is of pagan origin and quite ancient.
    It originates from the Proto-Indo-European root *\*bhag* (meaning
    fortune), being cognate to Avestic *baga* and Sanskrit *bhagah*
    (epithets of deities).

Image:Bilibin. Baba Yaga.jpg|thumb|220px|An illustration of Baba Yaga by
Ivan Bilibin

-   The next level of development is a mythologisation of historical
    traditions. Beginning in pagan times, it continued well after the
    advent of Сhristianity. It is characterised by tales and songs of
    legendary heroes, ranging from purely legendary founders of certain
    tribes, such as the stories about Lech, Czech, and Rus, to quite
    historical persons such as the 15th century Croatian-Hungarian king
    Matthias Corvinus or the Serbian Prince Marko, who were both
    immortalised in folk legend or poetry. Russian bylinas about
    bogatyrs, Polish legends of Krak the Dragonslayer, Czech legends
    about Libuše, and the foundation of Prague all fall into this
    category. Various elements of these tales will still reveal elements
    of old myths (such as a hero slaying a dragon, a faint echo of an
    ancient concept of a cosmic battle between Perun the Thunderer and
    the serpentine Veles).

-   On an even lower level, certain mythical archetypes evolved into
    fairy-tale characters. These include Baba Yaga, Koschei the
    Immortal, Nightingale the Robber, Vodyanoy, Zmey Gorynych, and so
    on. At this point of development, one can hardly speak of mythology
    anymore. Rather, these are legends and stories which contain some
    fragments of old myths, but their structure and meaning are not so
    clear.

Image:NocKupaly.jpg|thumb|Celebration of the Kupala Night, Native Polish
Church

-   The lowest level of development of Slavic mythology includes various
    groups of home or nature spirits and magical creatures, which vary
    greatly amongst different Slavic nations. Mythic structure on this
    level is practically incomprehensible, but some of the beliefs
    nevertheless have a great antiquity. As early as the 5th century,
    Procopius mentioned that Slavs worshipped river and nature spirits,
    and traces of such beliefs can still be recognised in the tales
    about vilas, vampires, witches, and werewolves.

Slavic paganism today
---------------------

Image:Slavic neopaganism.jpg|thumb|A Slavic pagan ritual in modern
Russia.

For the last few decades, Slavic paganism has gained limited popularity
among the Russian public, with many web sites and organizations
dedicated to the study of Slavic mythology and some who openly call for
"returning to the roots."

Some musicians are also influenced by paganism, such as pagan metal band
Arkona.

Most of the neopagan movements take place in Russia and Belarus, but
they also take place in other Slavic countries like Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia, Macedonia, Bulgaria, Slovenia, Slovakia, Poland,
Croatia, Czech republic and Ukraine.
