Russia is one of the most successful countries at a number of sports and
continuously finishing in the top rankings at the Olympic Games. Russia
is the successor of (and the Russian SFSR was the largest part of) the
Soviet Union (USSR) and during the Soviet era, the Soviet team placed
first in the total number of medals won at 14 of its 18 appearances;
with these performances, the USSR was the dominant Olympic power of its
era.

Since the Olympic Games in Helsinki in 1952 and continuing today, Soviet
and later Russian athletes never went below third place in the world
(never below second until the most recent Olympics), in number and gold
medals collected at the Summer Olympics. Russia has finished in the top
five at every Paralympic Winter Games since 1994, and is continuously
climbing the rankings at the Paralympic Summer Games.

Among the most played sports in Russia are basketball, ice hockey, bandy
and football. Other sports widely played in Russia include team
handball, weightlifting, gymnastics, figure skating, biathlon, boxing,
wrestling, martial arts, volleyball, rugby union, and skiing.

Basketball
----------

The Soviet Union was traditionally very strong in basketball, winning
various Olympic tournaments, World Championships and Eurobasket; its
legal successor the Russian national basketball team is considered as a
worldwide basketball force. In 2007, Russia defeated world champions
Spain to win EuroBasket 2007. Russian basketball clubs such as PBC CSKA
Moscow (2006 and 2008 Euroleague Champions) have had great success in
European competitions such as the Euroleague and the ULEB Cup. At the
moment there are three Russian players in the NBA: Andrei Kirilenko of
the Brooklyn Nets, Alexey Shved of the Minnesota Timberwolves, and
Denver Nuggets center Timofey Mozgov.

Ice hockey
----------

The Russian men's national ice hockey team is the national ice hockey
team of Russia and are controlled by the Ice Hockey Federation of
Russia. They are currently rated first in IIHF World Rankings. The team
has been competing internationally since 1993 and follows a long
tradition of Soviet teams mostly composed of Russian players. The
Russian team replaced the Unified Team of the ice hockey at the 1992
Winter Olympics and the Commonwealth of Independent States team of the
1992 World Championships.

The Russian team has not been as dominant as the Soviet team, winning
the gold in the World Championships three times in 18 years, but it
remains one of the top teams in the world. Russia finished fourth at the
2006 Winter Olympics. Russia has a total of 77,702 players, about 0.05%
of its population. As of August 2006, their head coach was Vyacheslav
"Slava" Bykov.

The top three nominees for the 2009 Hart Memorial Trophy (the most
valuable player award in the National Hockey League) all play for the
Russian team: Alexander Ovechkin, Pavel Datsyuk, and Evgeni Malkin.

Russia's ice hockey team has a long history of tradition and success,
and today about 30 Russians play in the NHL. During the Soviet era,
hockey was one of the dominant sports, and members of the national team
were given the finest apartments and cars.

The 1972 Summit Series between Canada and the Soviets proved that Russia
produced some of the finest players in the world, losing the 8 game
series 4-3-1.

-   1994 - Finished in 4th place
-   1998 - Won silver medal
-   2002 - Won bronze medal
-   2006 - Finished in 4th place

From 1956 to 1988 the Soviet Union national hockey team won seven gold
medals, one silver medal, and one bronze medal in nine appearances. The
Unified team at the 1992 Olympics also won the gold medal.

World championship records:

  Year   Location                              Result
  ------ ------------------------------------- ----------------------------
  1992   Prague / Bratislava,                  5th place
  1993   Dortmund / Munich,                    bgcolor=gold| **Gold**
  1994   Bolzano / Canazei / Milan,            5th place
  1995   Stockholm / Gävle,                    5th place
  1996   Vienna,                               4th place
  1997   Helsinki / Turku / Tampere,           4th place
  1998   Zurich / Basel,                       5th place
  1999   Oslo / Lillehammer / Hamar,           5th place
  2000   Saint Petersburg,                     11th place
  2001   Cologne / Hanover / Nuremberg,        6th place
  2002   Gothenburg / Karlstad / Jönköping,    bgcolor=silver| **Silver**
  2003   Helsinki / Tampere / Turku,           7th place
  2004   Prague / Ostrava,                     10th place
  2005   Innsbruck / Vienna,                   **Bronze**
  2006   Riga,                                 5th place
  2007   Moscow / Mytishchi,                   **Bronze**
  2008   Quebec City / Halifax,                bgcolor=gold| **Gold**
  2009   Bern / Kloten,                        bgcolor=gold| **Gold**
  2010   Cologne / Mannheim / Gelsenkirchen,   bgcolor=silver| **Silver**
  2011   Bratislava / Košice,                  4th place
  2012   Helsinki, / Stockholm,                bgcolor=gold| **Gold**

In recent years, starting in 2007, the Russian team has put a strong
team on the ice for the World Championships. They had a record of 8-1-0
in the 2007 tournament, 9-0-0 in the 2008 tournament, 9-0-0 in 2009,
8-1-0 in 2010, and best of all 10-0-0 in 2012.

Bandy
-----

One traditionally popular sport is bandy (informally called "Russian
hockey"). It's considered a national sport, and is one of the biggest
spectator sports. The modern rules were written in England, but the
Russians claim to be the inventors of the game. The Soviet Union won all
the Bandy World Championships from the start 1957 until 1979. Russia is
almost always between the two best and has never missed out on a medal.
The attendance has decreased in the last few years. It's still one of
the biggest spectator sports though. After 10 rounds of the 2011-2012
Russian Bandy League the average attendance was
3,887.[1](http://translate.google.ca/translate?hl=en&sl=ru&u=http://bandynet.ru/node/23247&ei=XEPhTpSGEYzMtAaihc3yAw&sa=X&oi=translate&ct=result&resnum=1&sqi=2&ved=0CDIQ7gEwAA&prev=/search%3Fq%3Dhttp://bandynet.ru/node/23247%26hl%3Den%26biw%3D1024%26bih%3D677%26prmd%3Dimvns)
The club with biggest public support is HC Kuzbass from Kemerovo. About
26,000 watched the opening game against Dynamo Moscow. Dynamo Kazan is
the current champion of the national league after Dynamo Moscow having
won 2006-2010. Bandy is the only sport to enjoy the patronage of the
Russian Orthodox Church since they're very interested in strengthening
their national
traditions.[2](http://translate.google.co.uk/translate?hl=en&sl=ru&u=http://bandynet.ru/node/15183&ei=iZ1MTeu6JoKyhAepkb2oDg&sa=X&oi=translate&ct=result&resnum=1&sqi=2&ved=0CBwQ7gEwAA&prev=/search%3Fq%3Dhttp://bandynet.ru/node/15183%26hl%3Den%26prmd%3Divns)

Bandy is a team winter sport played on ice, in which skaters use sticks
to direct a ball into the opposing team's goal. The rules of the game
have many similarities to those of association football. The game is
played on a rectangle of ice, the same size as a football field. Each
team has eleven players, one of whom is the goalkeeper. A standard bandy
match consists of two halves of 45 minutes each. The offside rule is
also similar to that observed in football.

Figure skating
--------------

.

The Russian figure skating championships are a figure skating national
championship held annually to determine the national champions of
Russia. Skaters compete at the senior level in the disciplines of men's
singles, women's singles, pair skating, and ice dancing. The first
Russian national competition was held on March 5, 1878 in St.
Petersburg, Russian Empire. The winner was V. I. Sreznevski. From
1897-present, official Russian national championships in figure skating
were held. The first national champion of Russia in figure skating was
Alexandr Nikitich Panshin, who won the Russian nationals from 1897 to
1900.

Between 1924 and 1990 Russian national championships in figure skating
were not held. During this time, Russian skaters competed at the Soviet
Union Figure Skating Championships.

Other winter sports
-------------------

Other winter sports the Soviets or Russia are dominant in are
cross-country skiing (especially women's), bobsleigh, biathlon, speed
skating, skeleton and luge.

Football
--------

Australian Rules Football
-------------------------

Australian rules football was introduced to Russia in 2011. Early
success for Russian Australian Rules Football came in the form of one of
the Locomotive Australian Rules Football Club's junior team of 1987
which was sent to England to compete in a series of matches. Despite
being expected to lose every game to their far more experienced
opponents, the youngsters won all five of their matches. This proved
that Russia could take to Australian Football as well as any other
country.

Taturyan's work allowed Australian Football to become established; more
importantly it was established before the onset of the chaos that
accompanied the dissolution of the USSR, which would have made it nearly
impossible to establish a new sport in Russia after 1991. Luckily by
that time the Russian Australian Football League (RAFL) had already been
established.

**CHALLENGE CUP**

Two teams each year take part in the British Challenge Cup, along with
four teams from France including Les Catalans, although the challenge
cup is not considered to be a 'European Cup', more a domestic
competition in the UK that invites these teams into the early rounds.

Rugby union
-----------

Rugby union is a growing sport in Russia. Russia is ranked 17th
worldwide by the International Rugby Board (IRB), with over one hundred
clubs and close to 20,000 players nationally.

Russian domestic rugby went professional in 2005 with the launch of the
Professional Rugby League. After a post-Soviet lull, Russian players are
again signing with major clubs in England and France.

Krasnoyarsk, a large Siberian city, has traditionally been the
stronghold of Russian rugby union. Domestic matches are covered in the
local media, and the intra-city derby match between sides Krasny Yar and
Enisei-STM can attract large crowds.

Rugby football in the Russian Empire pre-dated the Russian Revolution by
a number of years, but it was only played sporadically. It appears to
have been the first (non-indigenous) football code to be played in
Russia, around a decade before the introduction of association football.
Mr Hopper, a Scotsman, who worked in Moscow arranged a match in the
1880s; the first football match was in 1892. In 1886, however, the
Russian police clamped down on rugby because they considered it "brutal,
and liable to incite demonstrations and riots" Condemnation by the
tsar's police probably deterred many people from playing, and records of
rugby over the next thirty years are sparse.

Russia qualified and competed in the 2011 Rugby World Cup in New Zealand
as Europe 2 after finishing second in the 2008-10 ENC. This was the
team's debut in the tournament, where they faced Australia, Ireland,
Italy and the United States in Group C of the tournament. Being the
second-lowest-ranked team in the tournament, Russia performed
comparatively well in their opening match, running the USA close in an
encounter which was lost 6-13. This was followed by comprehensive losses
against Italy (53-17), Ireland (62-12) and Australia (68-22).

Tennis
------

Since the end of the Soviet era, tennis has grown in popularity and
Russia has produced a number of famous tennis players. In recent years,
the amount of top Russian women players has been considerable, with both
Maria Sharapova and Dinara Safina reaching number one in the WTA
rankings. Other Russian women to achieve international success include
Anna Chakvetadze, Elena Dementieva, Svetlana Kuznetsova, Anastasia
Myskina, Nadia Petrova, Vera Zvonareva and Anna Kournikova. The Russian
Federation has won the Fed Cup 4 times, in 2004, 2005, 2007 and 2008.

At the 2008 Beijing Olympics, Russia swept the women's tennis podium
with Elena Dementieva winning the gold, Dinara Safina and Vera Zvonareva
the silver and bronze, respectively. As of October 16, 2009, two Russian
women were ranked in the WTA tour's top 10; with an additional two in
the Top 20.

Russia also boasts two former number 1 men's players—Safina's older
brother Marat Safin and Yevgeny Kafelnikov. Russian men currently in the
top 50 include Nikolay Davydenko, Igor Andreev, Igor Kunitsyn, and
Mikhail Youzhny. The Russian men won the Davis Cup in 2002 and 2006.

Rhythmic gymnastics
-------------------

Rhythmic gymnastics is considered one of the most popular sports in
Russia. In addition, it is considered in general that Russia has the
best rhythmic gymnasts. Evgenia Kanaeva, three-time all around world
champion and first and only back to back gold medallist at the olympic
games, Irina Tchachina, Galima Shugurova, Alina Kabaeva, Daria
Kondakova, Daria Dmitrieva, Amina Zaripova, Daria Kondakova, Vera
Sessina, Margarita Mamun, Yanina Batyrchina, Maria Titova, Alexandra
Soldatova, Yana Kudryavtseva, Daria Svatkovskaya, and Yulia Barsukova
are amongst Russia' top rhythmic gymnasts. There are many rhythmic
gymnastics clubs in Russia and the most famous one is the Gazprom School
which Irina Viner teaches rhythmic gymnasts in Novogorsk, Moscow, where
the Russian National team is also based.

Chess
-----

Chess is a favorite pastime, and a sport that has been dominated by
Russians in the post-war (1945-) era. The winner of the 1948 World Chess
Championship, Russian Mikhail Botvinnik, started an era of Soviet
dominance in the chess world. Until the end of the Soviet Union, there
was only one non-Soviet champion.

Today, 24 of the world's top 100 chess players are Russian.

Orienteering
------------

The **Russian Orienteering Federation** (Russian: Федерация Спортивного
Ориентирования (ФСО)) is the Russian national organisation of
orienteering. It is a full member of the International Orienteering
Federation.

Martial arts
------------

Motorsport
----------

Vitaly Petrov became Russia's first Formula One driver in 2010. So far
he has driven in F1 for three seasons with the Renault and Caterham F1
teams. He scored the best result of his career when he finished third at
the 2011 Australian Grand Prix. A Russian Grand Prix is scheduled to
join the calendar for the 2014 Formula One season, to be held at the
Sochi Olympic Park Circuit.

Russian car manufacturer Lada (known domestically as AvtoVAZ) has
competed in the World Touring Car Championship, making their debut in
2008 with Russian Bears Motorsport entering Lada 110s. Lada provided
factory support in 2009, with the team running three cars and upgrading
to the Lada Priora during the season. The team's best performances were
a pair of sixth places by James Thompson at the Race of Italy. Lada
subsequently withdrew from the championship, but they returned in 2012,
entering a Lada Granta WTCC driven by Thompson at a couple of race
meetings. Subsequently they announced plans to contest a full season in
2013.
