Television is the most popular medium in Russia, with 74% of the
population watching national television channels routinely and 59%
routinely watching regional channels. There are 3300 television channels
in total. 3 channels have a nationwide outreach (over 90% coverage of
the Russian territory): First Channel, Rossiya and NTV.

History
-------

Between 1941 and 1945 all television broadcasts in the nation were
interrupted because of Nazi Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union.
During these early years, most television programs were about life in
the Soviet Union, cultural activities and sports.

In 1960 a second national television channel was established. This
initial expansion of activity encompassed mostly the city of Moscow, but
to a lesser extent also Leningrad, the Urals, Siberia and the Ukrainian
SSR. Each republic, area or region had its own television station.

In the 1970s and 1980s, television become the preeminent mass medium. In
1988 approximately 75 million households owned television sets, and an
estimated 93 percent of the population watched television. Moscow, the
base from which most of the television stations broadcast, transmitted
some 90 percent of the country's programs, with the help of more than
350 stations and nearly 1,400 relay facilities.

Updating the television in the Soviet Union, the release of its
censorship by the Central Committee, began with the proclamation at the
XXVII Congress of the new General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev's new
political course of the party in relation to the country. Chairman of
the Radio and Television was Alexander Aksenov.

In 1991, the Soviet era Gosteleradio state system included four national
television channels, 52 stations in the former Soviet republics and 78
regional stations in the Russian Federation.

Today there are about 15,000 transmitters in the country. Development of
domestic digital TV transmitters, led within "Multichannel" research
program, had already been finished. New domestic digital transmitters
have been developed and installed in Nizhniy Novgorod and Saint
Petersburg in 2001-2002.

Legislation
-----------

In the Russian Constitution was adopted by national referendum on
December 12, 1993, article 29 "On the Rights and Freedoms of the Person
and Citizen" establishes the universal right to freedom of thought and
opinion, freedom of expression of beliefs and convictions, and freedom
to seek, receive, transmit, produce and disseminate information. This
right can be limited only by law and only "in the interests of
protecting the Constitution, morality, health, rights and lawful
interests of other persons, or for the defence of the country and
national security". According to the Constitution, only the law can
limit freedom of speech and establish limits for its expression. The
fundamental piece of media-specific federal legislation is the Law *on
Mass Media*, which was passed on December 27, 1991 and took effect on
February 13, 1992.

The law reinforces the freedom of information and unacceptability of
censorship. It also contains provisions regulating the founding,
ownership and use of mass media, and dissemination of information. The
law regulates relations between mass media and citizens and/or
organisations, determines the rights and obligations of journalists and
establishes responsibility for violations of mass media-related laws.
The Law on Mass Media allows private broadcasting and limits the rights
of foreign individuals to found mass media in Russia.

Satellite television
--------------------

The first Soviet communication satellite, called Molniya, was launched
in 1965. By November, 1967 the national system of satellite television,
called Orbita was deployed. The system consisted of 3 highly elliptical
Molniya satellites, Moscow-based ground uplink facilities and about 20
downlink stations, located in cities and towns of remote regions of
Siberia and Far East. Each station had a 12-meter receiving parabolic
antenna and transmitters for re-broadcasting TV signal to local
householders.

However, a large part of Soviet central regions were still not covered
by transponders of Molniya satellites. By 1976 Soviet engineers
developed a relatively simple and inexpensive system of satellite
television (especially for Central and Northern Siberia). It included
geostationary satellites called Ekran equipped with powerful 300 W UHF
transponders, a broadcasting uplink station and various simple receiving
stations located in various towns and villages of Siberian region. The
typical receiving station, also called *Ekran*, represented itself as a
home-use analog satellite receiver equipped with simple Yagi-Uda
antenna. Later, Ekran satellites were replaced by more advanced Ekran-M
series satellites.

In 1979 Soviet engineers developed *Moskva* (or Moscow) system of
broadcasting and delivering of TV signal via satellites. New type of
geostationary communication satellites, called Gorizont, were launched.
They were equipped by powerful onboard transponders, so the size of
receiving parabolic antennas of downlink stations was reduced to 4 and
2.5 meters (in comparison of early 12- meter dishes of standard orbital
downlink stations).

By 1989 an improved version of *Moskva* system of satellite television
has been called *Moskva Global'naya* (or Moscow Global). The system
included a few geostationary Gorizont and Express type of communication
satellites. TV signal from Moscow Global’s satellites could be received
in any country of planet except Canada and North-West of the USA.

Modern Russian satellite broadcasting services based on powerful
geostationary buses such as Gals (satellite), Express, Yamal and
Eutelsat which provide a large quantity of free-to-air television
channels to millions of householders. Pay-TV is growing in popularity
amongst Russian TV viewers. The NTV Russia news company, owned by
Gazprom, broadcasts the NTV Plus package to 560,000 households, reaching
over 1.5 million viewers.

Six out of these seven satellites are new vehicles: four belong to the
"Express-AM" family (set into orbit in 2003-2005), and two to the family
"Express-A" (set to the orbit in 2000-2002). SESC has also the centre
for TV/Radio signal compression, and the formation of transport flows as
per the MPEG-2/DVB standard, which ensures the formation of packages
from federal TV/ radio channels.

By May 2013, Of the 53 million TV homes in Russia, 24% were equipped for
Direct-to-Home satellite reception, making satellite the country’s
leading platform for digital television. The number of satellite homes
across Russia maintains a strong dynamic, increasing by 25% between 2011
and 2013 from 8 million to 12.6 million. 10% of these homes receive
signals from more than one satellite position, taking the total number
of antennas to 13.8 million.

Cable television
----------------

Cable television introduced in the 2000s, and began growing much in the
early 2010s. In the 2010s operators began upgrading their networks to
DVB-C and adding new services such as video on demand, catch-up-TV and
others. In 2012, cable television accounted for more than half of all
pay-TV subscribers (58%).

Distribution of the terrestrial channels
----------------------------------------

The distribution of the terrestrial channels is the task of the Unitary
Enterprise Russian Satellite Communications Company, which has 11
satellites, and the Federal Unitary Enterprise "Russian TV and Radio
Broadcasting Network" serving 14,478 TV sets in Russia (90.9% of the
total number). TV and radio channels are broadcast through the
terrestrial satellite communications complexes owned by the Russian
Satellite Communications Company at teleports located in Medvezhy Ozera
, Vladimir and Dubna, which ensure the transmission of channels to all
five time zones in Russia via the space vehicles of RTRN.

Digital broadcasting
--------------------

Different alternatives were considered in the process of preparing
proposals on shifting the country to digital broadcasting (thematic
discussions began in the early 2000s), but the Ministry of IT and
Communication decided to focus solely on terrestrial broadcasting as the
object of digital TV implementation. In Russia, the first legal act to
set the standards for the digital transition was the Government
Resolution No. 1700-r of 29 November 2007, which approved a Concept
Paper for the Development of TV and Radio Broadcasting in the Russian
Federation in 2008-2015. This document was elaborated by the high-level
Governmental Commission on Development of TV and Radio Broadcasting
originally headed by Dmitry Medvedev in his capacity as first vice-chair
of the government.

### Beginning

In December 2005, a project was launched to create a digital television
network in the Republic of Mordovia, where the DVB-T standard will be
utilised. The project objective was to ensure, for the population, the
possibility of receiving a large (up to 10) number of TV channels and
several radio stations in the stereo broadcasting mode and in the
digital DVB-T standard. The project was implemented by OJSC "Volga
Telecom" (a subsidiary of OJSC "Sviazinvest") with support from the
Ministry of Information Technologies and Communication of Russia, the
Ministry of Culture, the National Association of TV Broadcasters and
administration of the Republic of Mordovia.

The transition of terrestrial TV from analogue into digital format (in
DVB-T standard) has been announced as being a government priority in
Russia and identified in the document Concept of TV Broadcasting
Development in Russian Federation within 2008-2015. The main positive
factor in the introduction of terrestrial TV broadcasting in DVB-T
standard, according to the opinion of market players, has been the
approval of a TV broadcasting development framework in the Russian
Federation for 2008-2015 (approved by resolution of the RF Government \#
1700-p, dated 29 November 2007).

The total investments in the transition of terrestrial TV from analogue
into digital format are expected to be Euro 10 billion during the period
2008-2015.

The main factors that have a high positive influence upon the rates of
terrestrial DTV introduction tend to be general political and
macroeconomic factors. Commercial factors do not have a significant
influence upon rates of introduction of digital standards for
terrestrial broadcasting. Cable television would gain the largest
financial benefits from the introduction of digital television.

On May 10 during Sviaz-Expocomm – 2011, the 23rd International
Exhibition of Information Technologies and Communication Services in
Moscow, Russia’s national telecommunications operator Svyazinvest,
together with Russian Television and Radio Broadcasting Network signed a
cooperation agreement to organize the terrestrial transmission of
digital content to the RRBN transmitters across the country, thus
enabling the broadcasting of eight federal TV channels (Channel One,
Russia 1, Russia 24, Russia 2, Russia K, Channel 5, NTV, and Karusel)
and one local channel (it's "first multiplex" of digital television).

On June 2011 DVB-T2 tests got under way in Moscow. On July 2011 The
Russian government commission on the development of TV and radio
broadcasting, has supported the Communications and Mass Media Ministry’s
suggestion to roll out DVB-T2 test zones, the government’s press service
has announced.

On September 2011 a governmental commission had approved the use of the
DVB-T2 standard for the development of digital terrestrial TV in Russia,
as proposed by the Ministry of Communications. The digital terrestrial
TV network is currently being tested out in the Tver region. According
to the plan new regional networks will be deployed under the DVB-T2
standard and existing DVB-T networks will be upgraded to the new
standard

List of channels
----------------

This is a list of television channels that broadcast in **Russia**.
:ru:Телеканалы России|Full list of channels

### State-owned

  Name                                    Owner                                                                          Established   Website
  --------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------- ---------
  Russia 1                                VGTRK                                                                          1991          
  Russia 2                                VGTRK                                                                          2003          
  Russia 24                               VGTRK                                                                          2006          
  Russia K                                VGTRK                                                                          1997          
  VGTRK-Region                            VGTRK                                                                          planned       
  Carousel                                Channel One Russia and VGTRK                                                   2010          
  TV Tsentr                               Moscow Media (state-owned)                                                     1997          
  Moskva 24                               Moscow Media (state-owned)                                                     2011          
  Telekanal Zvezda                        Ministry of Defence                                                            2005          
  RT (English)                            TV-Novosti                                                                     2005          
  Rusiya Al-Yaum (Arabic version of RT)   TV-Novosti                                                                     2007          
  Public Television of Russia             Russian government                                                             2013          
  MIR                                     10 states from CIS                                                             1992          
  Channel One Russia                      Russian government (51%), Roman Abramovich (24%), National Media Group (25%)   1995          
  Spas TV                                 Russian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate                             2006          

### Private

  Name                                      Owner                                                     Established   Website
  ----------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------- ------------- -----------------------------------
  NTV                                       Gazprom Media (Gazprombank)                               1993          
  TNT                                       Gazprom Media (Gazprombank)                               1998          
  NTV Plus Sport plus                       Gazprom Media (Gazprombank)                               2009          
  Friday!                                   Gazprom Media (Gazprombank)                               2013          <http://friday.ru/>
  2×2 (TV channel)                          Gazprom Media (Gazprombank)                               1989          <http://2x2tv.ru/>
  TV3 Russia                                Gazprom Media (Gazprombank)                               1994          <http://tv3russia.ru/>
  Petersburg - Channel 5                    National Media Group (72%)                                1938          <http://5-tv.ru/>
  REN TV                                    National Media Group                                      1997          <http://ren-tv.com/>
  CTC TV                                    CTC Media (MTG (37,94%) & NMG (25,01%))                   1996          <http://ctc-tv.ru/>
  Domashniy                                 CTC Media (MTG (37,94%) & NMG (25,01%))                   2005          <http://domashniy.ru/>
  Peretz                                    CTC Media (MTG (37,94%) & NMG (25,01%))                   2011          <http://peretz.ru/>
  Muz-TV                                    UTV Russia Holding                                        1996          <http://muz-tv.ru/>
  U                                         UTV Russia Holding                                        2012          <http://u-tv.ru/>
  Disney Channel (Russia)                   UTV Russia Holding (51%), The Walt Disney Company (49%)   2011          <http://disney.ru/kanal>
  RBC TV                                    RBC                                                       2003          <http://tv.rbc.ru/>
  Dozhd                                     private investors                                         2010          <http://tvrain.ru/>
  A-One                                     private investors                                         2005          <http://www.a1tv.ru/>
  Nickelodeon Russia                        Viacom, Media Broadcast Company                           1998          <http://nickelodeon.ru/>
  Discovery Channel Russia                  Discovery Networks EMEA                                   2006          <http://www.discoverychannel.ru/>
  Animal Planet Russia                      Discovery Networks EMEA                                   2006
  TLC Russia                                Discovery Networks EMEA                                   2011
  MTV Russia                                Viacom                                                    1998          <http://mtv.ru/>
  Nickelodeon                               Viacom                                                    2002          <http://> nickelodeon.ru
  :en:Multimania|Multimania                 Voxell Baltic                                             2006          <http://www.multimania.tv>
  Kinomania                                 Voxell Baltic                                             2005          <http://www.kinomania.tv>
  :en:Bridge-TV|BRIDGE TV (music channel)   Bridge Media Group                                        2005          <http://bridgetv.ru/en/>
  Russian Travel Guide                      Bridge Media Group                                        2009          <http://www.rtgtv.com/>
  RUSONG TV                                 Bridge Media Group                                        2010          <http://rusongtv.ru/en/>
  DANGE TV                                  Bridge Media Group                                        2013          <http://dangetv.ru/en/>
  Eurosport Russia                          TF1 Group (80%), Discovery Communications (20%)           1996          <http://www.eurosport.ru/>
  TV1000                                    Modern Times Group                                        2003          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  TV1000 Russkoe Kino                       Modern Times Group                                        2005          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  TV1000 Action East                        Modern Times Group                                        2008          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  Viasat History                            Modern Times Group                                        2004          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  Viasat Explorer                           Modern Times Group                                        2003          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  Viasat Sport East                         Modern Times Group                                        2006          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  Viasat Nature                             Modern Times Group                                        2010          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  TV1000 Comedy HD                          Modern Times Group                                        2012          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  TV1000 Premium HD                         Modern Times Group                                        2012          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  TV1000 Megahit HD                         Modern Times Group                                        2012          <http://ru.viasatworld.com/>
  Universal Channel Russia                  NBC Universal                                             2008          <http://www.universalchannel.ru/>
  Diva Universal Russia                     NBC Universal International                               2010          <http://www.divauniversal.ru/>
  Europa plus TV                            EMG & RED Media                                           2011          <http://www.europaplus.tv/>
  Ru.TV                                     RMG (RussianMediaGroup)                                   2006          <http://www.ru.tv/>
  O2TV|O~2~TV                               Media3                                                    2004          <http://o2tv.biz/en>
  RTVi                                      private investors                                         2002          <http://www.rtvi.ru/english.html>
  Cartoon Network                           Turner Broadcasting System co.ltd                         2009          <http://www.cartoonnetwork.ru>
  Cyber-Game.TV                             private investors                                         2012          <http://www.cyber-game.tv>

### Discontinued

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Name                     Owner                                                 Established   Closed
  ------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------- ------------- --------
  MTK                      Government of Moscow                                  1991          1997

  Ostankino Channel One    RSTRC Ostankino                                       1991          1995

  Ostankino Channel Four   RSTRC Ostankino                                       1991          1994

  Rossiyskiye University   RSTRC Ostankino and VGTRK                             1992          1994

  TV6                      MIBC (Moscow Independent Broadcasting Corporation)\   1993          2002
                           (Since 1999 - Boris Berezovsky and Lukoil-Garant)                   

  M1                       Mediainvest                                           1994          2005

  Channel 24               Kosmos-TV                                             1994          1999

  AMTV                     Marafon-TV and Moskva-Revyu                           1994          1996

  TeleExpo                 Moskomimuschestvo and MosExpo                         1995          2001

  Prometei AST             AST, Gazprom                                          1998          2002

  TVS                      Media-Sotsium                                         2002          2003

  Rambler TV               Prof-Media                                            2003          2007
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Most-viewed channels
--------------------

Weekly viewing shares, 11–17 November 2013:

  Position   Channel       Group                                                    Share of total viewing (%)
  ---------- ------------- -------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------
  1          Channel One   Government of Russia (51%), National Media Group (25%)   14.3
  2          Russia 1      VGTRK (state-owned)                                      13.8
  3          NTV           Gazprom-Media (Gazprombank)                              12.5
  4          TNT           Gazprom-Media (Gazprombank)                              7
  5          Channel 5     National Media Group (72%)                               6.1
  6          CTC           CTC Media (MTG 37,94%; National Media Group 25,01%)      5.8
  7          REN TV        National Media Group                                     4.6
  8          TV Center     Moscow-Media (state-owned)                               2.9
  9          Domashniy     CTC Media (MTG 37,94%; National media Group 25,01%)      2.7
  10         TV3           Prof-Media (private company)                             2.4


