The **Time of Troubles**  was a period of Russian history comprising
the years of interregnum between the death of the last Russian Tsar of
the Rurik Dynasty, Feodor Ivanovich, in 1598, and the establishment of
the Romanov Dynasty in 1613. In 1601–1603, Russia suffered a famine that
killed one-third of the population, about two million. At the time,
Russia was occupied by the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in the
Dymytriads, and suffered from civil uprisings, usurpers and impostors.

Causes
------

After Feodor's death, his brother-in-law and closest adviser, *boyar*
Boris Godunov, who had already acted as regent for the
mentally-challenged Feodor, was elected his successor by a Great
National Assembly (*Zemsky Sobor*). Godunov's short reign (1598–1605)
was not as successful as his administration under the weak Feodor.

Extremely poor harvests were encountered in 1601–1603, with nighttime
temperatures in all summer months often below freezing, wrecking crops;
see Russian famine of 1601–1603. The probable cause of climatic changes
was the eruption of Huaynaputina volcano in Peru in 1600. Widespread
hunger led to mass starvation; the government distributed money and
foodstuffs for poor people in Moscow, but that only led to refugees'
flocking to the capital and increasing the economic disorganization. The
oligarchical faction, headed by the Romanovs, considered it a disgrace
to obey a boyar; conspiracies were frequent; the rural districts were
desolated by famine and plague; large bands of armed brigands roamed the
country committing all manner of atrocities; the Don Cossacks on the
frontier were restless; and the government demonstrated it could not
keep order.

Under the influence of the great nobles who had unsuccessfully opposed
the election of Godunov, the general discontent was expressed as
hostility to him as a usurper. Rumours circulated that the late tsar's
younger brother Dmitri, thought to be dead, was still alive and in
hiding.

False Dmitri
------------

In 1603 a man calling himself Dmitri — first of the so-called False
Dmitris — and professing to be the rightful heir to the throne, appeared
in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. Dmitri had been stabbed to death
before his brother Feodor's death, allegedly by Godunov's order; but the
mysterious individual who was impersonating him was regarded as the
rightful heir by many of the population. He attracted support both in
Russia and outside its borders, particularly in the Polish Commonwealth
and the Papal States. Factions in the Polish Commonwealth saw him as a
tool to extend their influence over Russia, or at least gain wealth in
return for their support; the Papacy saw it as an opportunity to
increase the hold of Roman Catholicism over the Eastern Orthodox
Russians.

A few months later in 1603, Polish forces crossed the frontier with a
small force of 4,000 Poles, Lithuanians, Russian exiles, German
mercenaries and Cossacks from the Dnieper and the Don, in what marked
the beginning of the Polish Commonwealth's intervention in Russia, or
the Dymitriad wars. Although the Polish Commonwealth had not officially
declared war on Russia (as its king, Sigismund III Vasa, was opposed to
the intervention), some powerful magnates decided to support False
Dmitri with their own forces and money, in the expectation of rich
rewards afterward. False Dmitri was married *per procura* to Marina
Mniszech, and immediately after Godunov's death in 1605, he made his
triumphal entry into Moscow.

Shuisky's reign
---------------

The reign of False Dimitri was short. Before a year had passed, Vasily
Shuisky, an ambitious Rurikid prince (knyaz), formed a conspiracy
against him. His forces murdered False Dimitri soon after his marriage
in the Moscow Kremlin, together with many of his supporters, who were
brutally massacred. Shuisky and his men were estimated to have killed
2,000 Poles. The reaction to the massacre in Poland was strong, but the
government decided to postpone revenge against those responsible.

Shuisky seized power and was elected tsar by an assembly composed of his
faction, but the change did not satisfy the Russian boyars, Commonwealth
magnates, Cossacks, or the German mercenaries, and soon a new impostor,
likewise calling himself Dmitri, son and heir of Ivan the Terrible, came
forward as the rightful heir. Like his predecessor, he enjoyed the
protection and support of the Polish–Lithuanian magnates. After Shuisky
signed an alliance with Sweden, the king of the Commonwealth, Sigismund
III, seeing the Russian–Swedish alliance as a threat, resolved to
intervene and began the Polish-Muscovite War (1605–1618).

Second occupation
-----------------

Polish–Lithuanian troops crossed the Russian borders and laid siege to
the fortress of Smolensk. After the combined Russo–Swedish forces were
destroyed at the Battle of Klushino, Shuisky was forced to abdicate.
Before False Dmitri II could gain the throne, the Polish commander,
voivode, and magnate Stanisław Żółkiewski, put forward a rival
candidate: Sigismund's son, Władysław IV Vasa|Władysław. Some people in
Moscow swore allegiance to him on condition of his maintaining Orthodoxy
and granting certain privileges to them. On this understanding, they
allowed Polish troops to enter the city and occupy the Kremlin.

The Polish king opposed the compromise, deciding to take the throne for
himself and to convert Russia to Roman Catholicism. The contending
factions were opposed and his plan aroused the anti-Catholic and
anti-Polish feelings in Russia. The Swedes disapproved as they were
rivals of the Poles on the Baltic coast. They declared war on Russia,
supporting a false Dmitri of their choice in Ivangorod.

Russia was in a critical condition. The throne was vacant; the great
nobles (boyars) quarrelled among themselves; Orthodox Patriarch
Hermogenes was imprisoned; Catholic Poles occupied the Moscow Kremlin
and Smolensk; the Protestant Swedes occupied Novgorod; continuing Tatar
raids left the south borderlands of Russia completely depopulated and
devastated; and enormous bands of brigands swarmed everywhere. Tens of
thousands died in battles and riots; on 17–19 March 1611, the Poles and
German mercenaries suppressed riots in Moscow; they massacred 7,000
Muscovites and set the city on fire. Many other cities were also
devastated or weakened. For example, on 22 September 1612, the Poles and
Lithuanians exterminated the population and clergy of Vologda.

Struggle for independence
-------------------------

The nation rose together under the leadership of Kuzma Minin, a Nizhny
Novgorod merchant, and Prince Pozharsky. After the battle for Moscow on
22 October 1612 Old Style (1 November New Style), the invaders retreated
to the Kremlin, and on 24-27 October O.S. (3–6 November N.S.) the nearby
Polish army was forced to retreat. The garrison in the Kremlin
surrendered to the triumphant Pozharsky. Annually on 4 November, Russia
officially celebrates the anniversary of this event as a Day of National
Unity.

A Grand National Assembly elected as tsar Michael Romanov, the young son
of the metropolitan Philaret. He was connected by marriage with the late
dynasty and, according to the legend, had been saved from the enemies by
a heroic peasant, Ivan Susanin. After taking power, the new Tsar ordered
the 3-year-old son of the False Dmitri II to be hanged, and had Dmitri's
wife Maryna strangled.

The Ingrian Wars against Sweden lasted until the Treaty of Stolbovo in
1617. Russia's Dymitriad wars against the Commonwealth would last until
the Peace of Deulino in 1619. While gaining peace through the treaties,
both nations forced Russia to make some territorial concessions, though
they regained the majority of them over the coming centuries. Most
importantly, the crisis was instrumental in unifying all classes of the
Russian society around the Romanov tsars and established foundations for
the powerful Russian Empire.

In popular culture
------------------

This period of the "Time of Troubles" has inspired many artists and
playwrights in Russia and beyond. The three most popular topics are the
Pozharsky/Minin liberation of Moscow, the struggle between Boris Godunov
and False Dmitry, and the story of Ivan Susanin, a peasant who was said
to sacrifice himself to lead Poles away from Mikhail Romanov.

-   *Ivan Susanin*, an opera by Mikhail Glinka.
-   *Boris Godunov*, a play by Alexander Pushkin.
    -   *Boris Godunov*, an opera based on Pushkin's play, composed by
        Modest Mussorgsky.
-   *Dimitrij*, an opera by Antonín Dvořák, on one of the false Dmitris,
    based on a fragmentary play by Friedrich Schiller.
-   Monument to Minin and Pozharsky, on the Moscow Red Square.
-   *Minin and Pozharsky*, a film by Vsevolod Pudovkin.
-   *1612*, a 2007 historical fantasy film.

Russian and Polish artists have painted numerous works based on these
events.

Numerous histories have been written, as well. In 2001, Chester Dunning,
a specialist in Russian history at Texas A&M University published the
nearly 700-page *Russia's First Civil War: The Time of Troubles and the
Founding of the Romanov Dynasty*. Twelve years in the research and
writing, his work was a History Book Club selection published by the
Pennsylvania State University Press. Dunning's thesis is that modern
Russia begins in 1613 with the founding of the Romanov dynasty. He
covers the Time of Troubles and their contribution to the founding.
