**Tourism in Russia** has seen rapid growth since the late Soviet times,
first inner tourism and then international tourism as well. Rich
cultural heritage and great natural variety place Russia among the most
popular tourist destinations in the world. The country contains 23
UNESCO World Heritage Sites, while many more are on UNESCO's tentative
lists. Major tourist routes in Russia include a travel around the Golden
Ring of ancient cities, cruises on the big rivers like Volga, and long
journeys on the famous Trans-Siberian Railway. Diverse regions and
ethnic cultures of Russia offer many different food and souvenirs, and
show a great variety of traditions, like Russian banya, Tatar Sabantuy,
or Siberian shamanist rituals.

Unless exempt, tourists to Russia are required to purchase a visa, in
addition to having a valid passport. Visas cannot be purchased at the
border, and once at the border must be presented with other relevant
documents.

Statistics
----------

In 2012, 25.7 million international tourists arrived in Russia and
brought US\$11.2 billion in international tourism receipts to the
country. Including domestic and international tourism, the industry
directly contributed RUB860 billion to Russian GDP and supported 966,500
jobs in the country.

Cultural tourism
----------------

Most popular tourist destinations in Russia are Saint Petersburg (which
appeared in the list of top visited cities of Europe in 2010) and
Moscow, the current and the former capitals of the country and great
cultural centers, recognized as World Cities. Moscow and Saint
Petersburg feature such world-renown museums as Hermitage and Tretyakov
Gallery, famous theaters like Bolshoi and Mariinsky, ornate churches
like Saint Basil's Cathedral, Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, Saint
Isaac's Cathedral and Church of the Savior on Blood, impressive
fortifications like Moscow Kremlin and Peter and Paul Fortress,
beautiful squares like Red Square and Palace Square, and streets like
Tverskaya and Nevsky Prospect. Rich palaces and parks of extreme beauty
are found in the former Template:Imperial palaces in Russia|imperial
residences in suburbs of Moscow (Kolomenskoye, Tsaritsyno) and Saint
Petersburg (Peterhof, Strelna, Oranienbaum, Gatchina, Pavlovsk Palace,
Tsarskoye Selo). Moscow contains a great variety of impressive Soviet
era buildings along with modern scyscrapers, while Saint Petersburg,
nicknamed *Venice of the North*, boasts of its classical architecture,
many rivers, channels and bridges.

Kazan, the capital of Tatarstan, shows a unique mix of Christian Russian
and Muslim Tatar cultures. The city has registered a brand *The Third
Capital of Russia*, though a number of other major Russian cities
compete for this status, like Samara, Novosibirsk, Yekaterinburg and
Nizhny Novgorod, all being major cultural centers with rich history and
prominent architecture. Veliky Novgorod, Pskov, Dmitrov and the cities
of Golden Ring (Vladimir, Yaroslavl, Kostroma and others) have at best
preserved the architecture and the spirit of ancient and medieval Rus',
and also are among the main tourist destinations. Many old
fortifications (typically Kremlins), monasteries and churches are
scattered throughout Russia, forming its unique cultural landscape both
in big cities and in remote areas.

Resorts and nature tourism
--------------------------

The warm subtropical Black Sea coast of Russia is the site for a number
of popular sea resorts, like Sochi, known for its beaches and wonderful
nature. At the same time Sochi can boast a number of major ski resorts,
like Krasnaya Polyana; the city is the host of 2014 Winter Olympics. The
mountains of the Northern Caucasus contain many other popular ski
resorts, like Dombay in Karachayâ€“Cherkessia.

The most famous natural tourist destination in Russia is Lake Baikal,
named *the Blue Eye of Siberia*. This unique lake, oldest and deepest in
the world, has crystal-clean waters and is surrounded by taiga-covered
mountains.

Other popular natural destinations include Kamchatka with its volcanoes
and geysers, Karelia with its many lakes and granite rocks, Altai with
its snowy mountains and Tyva with its wild steppes.

Souvenirs and food
------------------

Typical souvenirs include Matryoshka doll and other handicraft, samovars
for water heating, ushanka and papaha warm hats, and fur clothes among
other items. Russian vodka and caviar are among the food that attracts
foreigners, along with honey, blini, pelmeni, borsch and other products
and dishes of Russian cuisine.

<center>
[File:TenorBalalaika1.jpg|Balalaika](File:TenorBalalaika1.jpg|Balalaika)
[File:Grayushanka.jpg|Ushanka](File:Grayushanka.jpg|Ushanka)
<File:Russian-Matroshka> no bg.jpg|Matryoshka <File:Russkaya>
garmon.jpg|Garmoshka [File:Stoli.jpg|Vodka](File:Stoli.jpg|Vodka)
<File:Selidi> pod shuboi.jpg|Selyodka <File:Chicken> Kiev.jpeg|Kotlety
<File:Caviar> butterbrot.jpg|Caviar <File:Russian> borscht with beef and
sour cream.jpg|Borsch <File:Cheburashka> (Cosplay).jpg |Cheburashka
[File:Vatrushka.jpg|Vatrushka](File:Vatrushka.jpg|Vatrushka)
[File:Kefir-okroshka.jpg|Okroshka](File:Kefir-okroshka.jpg|Okroshka)
[File:Valenki.jpg|Valenki](File:Valenki.jpg|Valenki) <File:Pioneers>
Member Pin.jpg|Vladimir Lenin

[File:Samovar.silver.jpg|Samovar](File:Samovar.silver.jpg|Samovar)

</center>
Foreign visitor arrivals in 2012
--------------------------------

\*\*: 375,285

\*\*: 343,357

\*\*: 179,763

\*\*: 135,949

\*\*: 120,306

\*\*: 118,729

\*\*: 100,918

\*\*: 99,581

\*\*: 85,955

\*\*: 70,291

\*\*: 48,425

\*\*: 44,667

\*\*: 36,260

\*\*: 32,533

\*\*: 32,125

\*\*: 30,088

\*\*: 28,845

\*\*: 28,076

\*\*: 27,436

\*\*: 26,600

\*\*: 23,862

\*\*: 21,060

\*\*: 20,617

\*\*: 18,600

\*\*: 16,700

\*\*: 14,500

\*\*: 13,200
