The **Tsardom of Russia** ( or, in hellenized form, ), also known as
**Tsardom of Muscovy**, was the name of the centralized Russian state
from Ivan IV's assumption of the title of Tsar in 1547 until Peter the
Great's foundation of the Russian Empire in 1721.

From 1550 to 1700, Russia grew 35,000 km^2^ (about the size of the
Netherlands) a year. The period includes the upheavals of the transition
from the Rurik to the Romanov dynasties, drawn-out military conflict
with the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth as well as the Russian conquest
of Siberia, leading up to the 42-year reign of Peter the Great, who
ascended in 1682 and transformed the Tsardom into a major European
power. After a military victory over Sweden and Poland, he implemented
substantial reforms and proclaimed the Russian Empire  in 1721, making
it a recognized power in Europe.

Name
----

While Ivan assumed the title of “Tsar and Grand Duke of all Rus'” (Царь
и Великий князь всея Руси), officially renaming the Grand Duchy of
Moscow to Tsardom of Russia, the state remained partly referred to as
Muscovy (*Moscovia*) throughout Europe, predominantly in its Catholic
part. The two names "Russia" and "Muscovy" appear to have co-existed as
interchangeable during the later 16th and throughout the 17th century
with different maps and sources using different names.

<File:Russia_Mercator_1595.jpg>|*Russia*, Mercator, 1595
<File:Herberstein-Moscovia.jpg>|*Moscovia*, Herberstein, 1549
<File:Blaeu> 1645 - Russi%C3%A6 vulgo Moscovia pars
australis.jpg|*Russia vulgo Moscovia*, Atlas Maior, 1645

According to prominent historians like Alexander Zimin or Anna
Khoroshkevich, the continuous using of the term Muscovy was a result of
the traditional habit and the need to distinguish between the Muscovite
and the Lithuanian part of the Rus, as well as of the political
interests of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth which competed with
Moscow for the western parts of the Rus'. Due to the propaganda of the
Commonwealth as well as of the Jesuits the term Muscovy was used instead
of Russia in many parts of Europe where prior to the reign of Peter the
Great there was a lack of direct knowledge of the country. Other
influential historians like Sigurd Shmidt, however, consider that the
name “Tsardom of Muscovy”, or “Muscovite Tsardom”, corresponds also
to the Russian historical usage.

Byzantine heritage
------------------

By the 16th century, the Russian ruler had emerged as a powerful,
autocratic figure, a Tsar. By assuming that title, the sovereign of
Moscow tried to emphasize that he was a major ruler or emperor on par
with the Byzantine emperor or the Mongol khan. Indeed, after Ivan III's
marriage to Sophia Palaiologina, the niece of Constantine XI
Palaiologos, the Moscow court adopted Byzantine terms, rituals, titles,
and emblems such as the double-headed eagle, which survives as the Coat
of Arms of Russia.

At first, the Byzantine term *autokrator* expressed only the literal
meaning of an independent ruler, but in the reign of Ivan IV (r.
1533-1584) it came to mean unlimited rule. Ivan IV was crowned Tsar and
thus was recognized, at least by the Russian Orthodox Church, as
Emperor. Philotheus of Pskov had claimed that, once Constantinople had
fallen to the Ottoman Empire in 1453, the Russian Tsar was the only
legitimate Orthodox ruler and that Moscow was the Third Rome because it
was the final successor to Rome and Constantinople, the centers of
Christianity in earlier periods. That concept was to resonate in the
self-image of Russians in future centuries.

Early reign of Ivan IV
----------------------

The development of the Tsar's autocratic powers reached a peak during
the reign of Ivan IV, and he became known as the Terrible (his Russian
epithet, *groznyi*, means "foreboding"). Ivan strengthened the position
of the Tsar to an exceptional degree, demonstrating the risks of
unrestrained power in the hands of a mentally unstable individual.
Although apparently intelligent and energetic, Ivan suffered from
breakdowns of paranoia and depression, and his rule was disrupted by
acts of intense violence.

Ivan IV became Grand Prince of Moscow in 1533 at the age of three. The
Shuysky and Belsky factions of the boyars competed for control of the
regency until Ivan assumed the throne in 1547. Reflecting Moscow's new
imperial claims, Ivan's coronation as Tsar was a ritual modeled after
those of the Byzantine emperors. With the continuing assistance of a
group of boyars, Ivan began his reign with a series of useful reforms.
In the 1550s, he declared a new law code, revamped the military, and
reorganized local government. These reforms undoubtedly were intended to
strengthen the state in the face of continuous warfare. The key
documents prepared by the so-called Select Council of advisors and
promulgated during this period are as follows.

Foreign policies of Ivan IV
---------------------------

Russia remained a fairly unknown society in western Europe until Baron
Sigismund von Herberstein published his Rerum Moscoviticarum Commentarii
(literally *Notes on Muscovite Affairs*) in 1549. This provided a broad
view of what had been a rarely visited and poorly reported state. In the
1630s, the Russian Tsardom was visited by Adam Olearius, whose lively
and well-informed writings were soon translated into all the major
languages of Europe.

Further information about Russia was circulated by English and Dutch
merchants. One of them, Richard Chancellor, sailed to the White Sea in
1553 and continued overland to Moscow. Upon his return to England, the
Muscovy Company was formed by himself, Sebastian Cabot, Sir Hugh
Willoughby, and several London merchants. Ivan the Terrible used these
merchants to exchange letters with Elizabeth I.

Despite the domestic turmoil of the 1530s and 1540s, Russia continued to
wage wars and to expand. It grew from 2.8 to 5.4 million km2 1533-84.
Ivan defeated and annexed the Khanate of Kazan on the middle Volga in
1552 and later the Astrakhan Khanate, where the Volga meets the Caspian
Sea. These victories transformed Russia into a multiethnic and
multiconfessional state, which it continues to be today. The tsar now
controlled the entire Volga River and gained access to Central Asia.

Expanding to the northwest toward the Baltic Sea proved to be much more
difficult. In 1558 Ivan invaded Livonia, eventually involving himself in
a twenty-five-year war against the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth,
Sweden, and Denmark. Despite occasional successes, Ivan's army was
pushed back, and the nation failed to secure a coveted position on the
Baltic Sea.

Hoping to make profit from Russia's concentration on Livonian affairs,
Devlet I Giray of Crimea, accompanied by as many as 120,000 horsemen,
repeatedly devastated the Moscow region, until the Battle of Molodi put
a stop to such northward incursions. But for decades to come, the
southern borderland was annually pillaged by the Nogai Horde and the
Crimean Khanate, who took local inhabitants with them as slaves. Tens of
thousands of soldiers protected the Great Abatis Belt — a burden for a
state whose social and economic development was stagnating. These wars
drained Russia.

Oprichnina
----------

During the late 1550s, Ivan developed a hostility toward his advisers,
the government, and the boyars. Historians have not determined whether
policy differences, personal animosities, or mental imbalance caused his
wrath. In 1565 he divided Russia into two parts: his private domain (or
oprichnina) and the public realm (or zemshchina). For his private
domain, Ivan chose some of the most prosperous and important districts
of Russia. In these areas, Ivan's agents attacked boyars, merchants, and
even common people, summarily executing some and confiscating land and
possessions. Thus began a decade of terror in Russia which culminated in
the Massacre of Novgorod (1570).

As a result of the policies of the *oprichnina*, Ivan broke the economic
and political power of the leading boyar families, thereby destroying
precisely those persons who had built up Russia and were the most
capable of administering it. Trade diminished, and peasants, faced with
mounting taxes and threats of violence, began to leave Russia. Efforts
to curtail the mobility of the peasants by tying them to their land
brought Russia closer to legal serfdom. In 1572 Ivan finally abandoned
the practices of the oprichnina.

According to a popular theory, the oprichnina was started by Ivan in
order to mobilize resources for the wars and to quell opposition to it.
Regardless of the reason, Ivan's domestic and foreign policies had a
devastating effect on Russia, and they led to a period of social
struggle and civil war, the so-called Time of Troubles (*Smutnoye
vremya*, 1598-1613).

Time of Troubles
----------------

Ivan IV was succeeded by his son Fedor, who was mentally deficient.
Actual power went to Fedor's brother-in-law, the boyar Boris Godunov
(who is credited with abolishing Yuri's Day, the only time of the year
when serfs were free to move from one landowner to another). Perhaps the
most important event of Fedor's reign was the proclamation of the
Patriarchate of Moscow in 1589. The creation of the patriarchate
climaxed the evolution of a separate and totally independent Russian
Orthodox Church.

In 1598 Fedor died without an heir, ending the Rurik Dynasty. Boris
Godunov then convened a *Zemsky Sobor*, a national assembly of boyars,
church officials, and commoners, which proclaimed him tsar, although
various boyar factions refused to recognize the decision. Widespread
crop failures caused the Russian famine of 1601–1603, and during the
ensuing discontent, a man emerged who claimed to be Tsarevich Demetrius,
Ivan IV's son who had died in 1591. This pretender to the throne, who
came to be known as False Dmitriy I, gained support in Poland and
marched to Moscow, gathering followers among the boyars and other
elements as he went. Historians speculate that Godunov would have
weathered this crisis had he not died in 1605. As a result, False
Dmitriy I entered Moscow and was crowned tsar that year, following the
murder of Tsar Fedor II, Godunov's son.

Subsequently, Russia entered a period of continuous chaos, known as *The
Time of Troubles* (Смутное Время). Despite the Tsar's persecution of the
boyars, the townspeople's dissatisfaction, and the gradual enserfment of
the peasantry, efforts at restricting the power of the Tsar were only
halfhearted. Finding no institutional alternative to the autocracy,
discontented Russians rallied behind various pretenders to the throne.
During that period, the goal of political activity was to gain influence
over the sitting autocrat or to place one's own candidate on the throne.
The boyars fought among themselves, the lower classes revolted blindly,
and foreign armies occupied the Kremlin in Moscow, prompting many to
accept Tsarist autocracy as a necessary means to restoring order and
unity in Russia.

The Time of Troubles included a civil war in which a struggle over the
throne was complicated by the machinations of rival boyar factions, the
intervention of regional powers Poland and Sweden, and intense popular
discontent, led by Ivan Bolotnikov. False Dmitriy I and his Polish
garrison were overthrown, and a boyar, Vasily Shuysky, was proclaimed
tsar in 1606. In his attempt to retain the throne, Shuysky allied
himself with the Swedes, unleashing the Ingrian War with Sweden. False
Dmitry II, allied with the Poles, appeared under the walls of Moscow and
set up a mock court in the village of Tushino.

In 1609 Poland intervened into Russian affairs officially, captured
Shuisky, and occupied the Kremlin. A group of Russian boyars signed in
1610 a treaty of peace, recognising Władysław IV Vasa|Ladislaus IV of
Poland, son of Polish king Sigismund III Vasa, as tsar. In 1611, False
Dmitry III appeared in the Swedish-occupied territories, but was soon
apprehended and executed. The Polish presence led to a patriotic revival
among the Russians, and a volunteer army, financed by the Stroganov
merchants and blessed by the Orthodox Church, was formed in Nizhny
Novgorod and, led by Prince Dmitry Pozharsky and Kuzma Minin, drove the
Poles out of the Kremlin. In 1613 a zemsky Sobor proclaimed the boyar
Mikhail Romanov as tsar, beginning the 300-year reign of the Romanov
family.

Romanovs
--------

The immediate task of the new dynasty was to restore order. Fortunately
for Russia, its major enemies, Poland and Sweden, were engaged in a
conflict with each other, which provided Russia the opportunity to make
peace with Sweden in 1617. The Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618) was
ended with the Truce of Deulino in 1618, restoring temporarily Polish
and Lithuanian rule over some territories, including Smolensk, lost by
the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in 1509.

The early Romanovs were weak rulers. Under Mikhail, state affairs were
in the hands of the tsar's father, Filaret, who in 1619 became Patriarch
of Moscow. Later, Mikhail's son Aleksey (r. 1645-1676) relied on a
boyar, Boris Morozov, to run his government. Morozov abused his position
by exploiting the populace, and in 1648 Aleksey dismissed him in the
wake of the Salt Riot in Moscow.

After an unsuccessful attempt to regain Smolensk from Poland in 1632,
Russia made peace with Poland in 1634. Polish king Władysław IV Vasa,
whose father and predecessor was Sigismund III Vasa, had been elected by
Russian boyars as tsar of Russia during the Time of Troubles, renounced
all claims to the title as a condition of the peace treaty.

Legal code of 1649
------------------

The autocracy survived the Time of Troubles and the rule of weak or
corrupt tsars because of the strength of the government's central
bureaucracy. Government functionaries continued to serve, regardless of
the ruler's legitimacy or the boyar faction controlling the throne. In
the 17th century, the bureaucracy expanded dramatically. The number of
government departments (*prikazy* ; sing., *prikaz* ) increased from
twenty-two in 1613 to eighty by mid-century. Although the departments
often had overlapping and conflicting jurisdictions, the central
government, through provincial governors, was able to control and
regulate all social groups, as well as trade, manufacturing, and even
the Orthodox Church.

The Sobornoye Ulozheniye, a comprehensive legal code introduced in 1649,
illustrates the extent of state control over Russian society. By that
time, the boyars had largely merged with the new elite, who were
obligatory servitors of the state, to form a new nobility, the
dvoryanstvo. The state required service from both the old and the new
nobility, primarily in the military because of permanent warfare on
southern and western borders and attacks of nomads. In return, the
nobility received land and peasants. In the preceding century, the state
had gradually curtailed peasants' rights to move from one landlord to
another; the 1649 code officially attached peasants to their home.

The state fully sanctioned serfdom, and runaway peasants became state
fugitives. Landlords had complete power over their peasants . Peasants
living on state-owned land, however, were not considered serfs. They
were organized into communes, which were responsible for taxes and other
obligations. Like serfs, however, state peasants were attached to the
land they farmed. Middle-class urban tradesmen and craftsmen were
assessed taxes, and, like the serfs, they were forbidden to change
residence. All segments of the population were subject to military levy
and to special taxes. By chaining much of Russian society to specific
domiciles, the legal code of 1649 curtailed movement and subordinated
the people to the interests of the state.

Under this code, increased state taxes and regulations altered the
social discontent that had been simmering since the Time of Troubles. In
the 1650s and 1660s, the number of peasant escapes increased
dramatically. A favourite refuge was the Don River region, domain of the
Don Cossacks. A major uprising occurred in the Volga region in 1670 and
1671. Stenka Razin, a Cossack who was from the Don River region, led a
revolt that drew together wealthy Cossacks who were well established in
the region and escaped serfs seeking free land. The unexpected uprising
swept up the Volga River valley and even threatened Moscow. Tsarist
troops finally defeated the rebels after they had occupied major cities
along the Volga in an operation whose panache captured the imaginations
of later generations of Russians. Razin was publicly tortured and
executed.

Acquisition of Ukraine
----------------------

Russia continued its territorial growth through the 17th century. In the
southwest, it acquired eastern Ukraine, which had been under
Polish–Lithuanian rule. The Zaporozhian Cossacks, warriors organized in
military formations, lived in the frontier areas bordering Poland, the
Crimean Tatar lands, and Russia. Although they had served in the Polish
army as registered mercenaries, the Cossacks of the Zaporozhian Host
remained fiercely independent and staged a number of rebellions against
the Poles. In 1648, the peasants of Ukraine joined the Cossacks in
rebellion during the Khmelnytsky Uprising, because of the social and
religious oppression they suffered under Polish rule. Initially,
Ukrainians were allied with Crimean Tatars, which had helped them to
throw off Polish rule. Once the Poles convinced the Tartars to switch
sides, the Ukrainians needed military help to maintain their position.

In 1654 the Ukrainian leader, Bohdan Khmelnytsky, offered to ally
Ukraine with the Russian tsar, Aleksey I. Aleksey's acceptance of this
offer, which was ratified in the Treaty of Pereyaslav, led to a
protracted war between Poland and Russia. The Truce of Andrusovo, which
ended the war in 1667, split Ukraine along the Dnieper River, reuniting
the western sector (or Right-bank Ukraine) with Poland and leaving the
eastern sector (Left-bank Ukraine) as the Cossack Hetmanate,
self-governing under the sovereignty of the tsar. However, the
self-government did not last long and Eastern Ukraine was eventually
fully incorporated into the Russian Empire.

Raskol
------

Russia's southwestern expansion, particularly its incorporation of
eastern Ukraine, had unintended consequences. Most Ukrainians were
Orthodox, but their close contact with the Roman Catholic and the Polish
Counter-Reformation also brought them Western intellectual currents.
Through the Ukrainian Academy in Kiev, Russia gained links to Polish and
Central European influences and to the wider Orthodox world. Although
the Ukrainian link induced creativity in many areas, it also weakened
traditional Russian religious practices and culture. The Russian
Orthodox Church discovered that its isolation from Constantinople had
caused variations to appear between their liturgical books and
practices.

The Russian Orthodox patriarch, Nikon, was determined to bring the
Russian texts back into conformity with the Greek texts and practices of
the time. But Nikon encountered opposition among the many Russians who
viewed the corrections as improper foreign intrusions. When the Orthodox
Church forced Nikon's reforms, a schism resulted in 1667. Those who did
not accept the reforms came to be called the Old Believers; they were
officially pronounced heretics and were persecuted by the church and the
state. The chief opposition figure, the protopope Avvakum, was burned at
the stake. The split afterwards became permanent, and many merchants and
peasants joined the Old Believers.

The tsar's court also felt the impact of Ukraine and the West. Kiev was
a major transmitter of new ideas and insight through the famed scholarly
academy that Metropolitan Mohyla founded there in 1631. Other more
direct channels to the West opened as international trade increased and
more foreigners came to Russia. The Tsar's court was interested in the
West's more advanced technology, particularly when military applications
were involved. By the end of the 17th century, Ukrainian, Polish, and
West European penetration had weakened the Russian cultural synthesis—at
least among the elite—and had prepared the way for an even more radical
transformation.

Conquest of Siberia
-------------------

Russia's eastward expansion encountered little resistance. In 1581 the
Stroganov merchant family, interested in fur trade, hired a Cossack
leader, Yermak Timofeyevich, to lead an expedition into western Siberia.
Yermak defeated the Khanate of Sibir and claimed the territories west of
the Ob and Irtysh rivers for Russia.

From such bases as Mangazeya, merchants, traders, and explorers pushed
eastward from the Ob River to the Yenisei River, then to the Lena River
and to the coast of the Pacific Ocean. In 1648 Cossack Semyon Dezhnyov
opened the passage between America and Asia. By the middle of the 17th
century, Russians had reached the Amur River and the outskirts of the
Chinese Empire.

After a period of conflict with the Qing Dynasty, Russia made peace with
China in 1689. By the Treaty of Nerchinsk, Russia ceded its claims to
the Amur Valley, but it gained access to the region east of Lake Baikal
and the trade route to Beijing. Peace with China strengthened the
initial breakthrough to the Pacific that had been made in the middle of
the century.

State Flags
-----------

There was no single Flag of Russia during the Tsardom. Instead, there
were multiple Flags:

-   Standards used by the Tsar:
    -   **Standard of the Tsar of Moscow** (1693–1700): white-blue-red
        tricolor with golden double-headed eagle in the center. Replaced
        by the Imperial standard in 1700 (see below).
    -   **Imperial Standard of the Tsar of Russia**: black double-headed
        eagle carrying St. Vladimir Red Coat of Arms, on a golden
        rectangular field, adopted in 1700 instead of the older
        white-blue-red Standard of the Tsar of Moscow.

-   **Civil Flag**: The early Romanov Tsars instituted the two-headed
    eagle Imperial Flag of the Tsar, which origin dates back to 1472, as
    a Civil Flag, it remained the Civil Flag of Russia until replaced
    during the Empire in 1858.
-   **Civil Ensign of Russia**: the white-blue-red tricolor, that was
    adopted on 20 January, 1705 by decree of Peter I.
-   **Naval Ensign of the Imperial Russian Navy**: white field with a
    blue saltire, adopted in 1712. Before that, the naval ensign of
    Russia was white-blue-red tricolor.
-   **Naval Jack of the Imperial Russian Navy**: red field with a blue
    saltire, adopted in 1700.

<center>
<File:Flag> of Tzar of Muscovia.svg|**Standard of the Tsar of Moscow**
(1693–1700)
<File:Standard_of_the_Emperor_of_Russia_(1858).svg>|**Imperial Standard
of the Tsar** (from 1700) <File:Flag> of Russia.svg|**Naval Ensign of
the Imperial Russian Navy** (1697–1699) and **Civil Ensign of Russia**
(from 1705) <File:Flag> of Russian Navy 1699 v1.svg|**Naval Ensign of
the Imperial Russian Navy** (1699–1700), a transitional variant between
the 1697–1699 Ensign and the Andreevsky Flag of 1712 <File:Naval> Jack
of Russia.svg|**Naval Jack of the Imperial Russian Navy** (from 1700)
<File:Naval> Ensign of Russia.svg|**Naval Ensign of the Imperial Russian
Navy** (from 1712)

</center>

