**Volga Bulgaria**, or **Volga–Kama Bulghar**, was a historic Islamic
Bulgar state that existed between the seventh and thirteenth centuries
around the confluence of the Volga and Kama rivers, in what is now
European Russia. The population was mostly Bulgars, who had conquered
Finno-Ugrics and Turkic speakers of the region. The population had been
pagan, but Islam was adopted as the state religion in the early tenth
century.

Origin and Creation of the State
--------------------------------

Information from first-hand sources on Volga Bulgaria is rather sparse.
As no authentic Bulgar records have survived, most of our information
comes from contemporary Arabic, Persian, Indian or Russian sources. Some
information is provided by excavations.

It is thought that the territory of Volga Bulgaria was originally
settled by Finno-Ugric peoples, including Mari people. The Bulgars of
Kubrat's son and appointed heir Batbayan Bezmer moved from the Azov
region in about AD 660, commanded by the Kazarig Khagan Kotrag to whom
he had surrendered. They reached Idel-Ural in the eighth century, where
they became the dominant population at the end of the 9th century,
uniting other tribes of different origin which lived in the area. Some
Bulgar tribes, however, continued westward and eventually settled along
the Danube River, in what is now known as Bulgaria proper, where they
created a confederation with the Slavs, adopting a South Slavic language
and the Eastern Orthodox faith.

Most scholars agree that the Volga Bulgars were subject to the Khazarian
Empire until the mid 10th century, when the Bulgars no longer paid
tribute to them. Threat from Khazaria was completely gone after
Khazaria's destruction and conquest by Sviatoslav in the late 10th
century, after which Volga Bulgaria grew greatly in size and power.
Sometime in the late 9th century unification processes started, and the
capital was established at Bolghar (also spelled Bulgar) city, 160 km
south from modern Kazan. Most scholars doubt, however, that the state
could assert independence from the Khazars until the latter were
annihilated by Svyatoslav of Rus in 965.

Conversion to Islam and further Statehood
-----------------------------------------

Islam was adopted as the state religion in the early tenth century,
under Almış|Almish ibn Shilki Yiltawar. Ibn Fadlan was dispatched by the
Abbasid Caliph al-Muqtadir in 922/3 to establish relations and bring
qadis and teachers of Islamic law to Volga Bulgaria, as well as help in
building a fort and a mosque. The Volga Bulgarians attempted to convert
Vladimir I of Kiev to Islam; however Vladimir rejected the notion of
Russians giving up wine, which he declared was the "very joy of their
lives".

Commanding the Volga River in its middle course, the state controlled
much of trade between Europe and Asia prior to the Crusades (which made
other trade routes practicable). The capital, Bolghar, was a thriving
city, rivalling in size and wealth with the greatest centres of the
Islamic world. Trade partners of Bolghar included from Vikings,
Bjarmland, Yugra and Nenets in the north to Baghdad and Constantinople
in the south, from Western Europe to China in the East. Other major
cities included Bilär, Suar (Suwar), Qashan|Qaşan (Kashan) and Cükätaw
(Juketau). Modern cities Kazan and Yelabuga were founded as Volga
Bulgaria's border fortresses.

Some of the Volga Bulgarian cities still have not been found, but they
are mentioned in Russian sources. They are: Aşlı|Ashli (Oshel), Tuxçin
(Tukhchin), İbrahim (Bryakhimov), Taw İle. Some of them were ruined
during and after the Golden Horde invasion.

The Russian principalities to the west posed the only tangible military
threat. In the 11th century, the country was devastated by several
Russian raids. Then, at the turn of the 12th and 13th centuries, the
rulers of Vladimir (notably Andrew the Pious and Vsevolod III), anxious
to defend their eastern border, systematically pillaged Bulgarian
cities. Under Russian pressure from the west, the Bulgars had to move
their capital from Bolghar to Bilär.

Demographics
------------

A large part of the region's population included Turkic or Iranian
groups such as Suars, Barsil, Bilars, Baranjars and part of Burtas (by
ibn Rustah). Modern Chuvashes descend from Suars and Kazan Tatars
descend from the Volga Bulgars. Another part comprised Finnic and Magyar
(Asagel and Pascatir) tribes, from which Bisermäns probably descend. Ibn
Fadlan refers to Volga Bulgaria as Saqaliba which is a general Arabic
term for Slavic people. Other researches tie the term to the ethnic name
Scythian (or Saka in Persian).

Decline
-------

In September 1223 near Samara an advance guard of Genghis Khan's army
under command of Uran, son of Subutai Bahadur, entered Volga Bulgaria
but was defeated in the battle of Samara Bend. In 1236, the Mongols
Siege of Bilär|returned and in five years had subjugated the whole
country, which at that time was suffering from internal war. Henceforth
Volga Bulgaria became a part of the Ulus Jochi, later known as the
Golden Horde. It was divided into several principalities; each of them
became a vassal of the Golden Horde and received some autonomy. By the
1430s, the Khanate of Kazan was established as the most important of
these principalities.

According to some historians, over 80% of the country's population was
killed during the invasion. The remaining population mostly relocated to
the northern areas (territories of modern Chuvashia and Tatarstan). Some
autonomous duchies appeared in those areas. The steppe areas of Volga
Bulgaria may have been settled by nomadic Kipchaks and Mongols, and the
agricultural development suffered a severe decline.

Over time, the cities of Volga Bulgaria were rebuilt and became trade
and craft centers of the Golden Horde. Some Bulgarians, primarily
masters and craftsmen, were forcibly moved to Sarai and other southern
cities of the Golden Horde. Volga Bulgaria remained a center of
agriculture and handicraft.

See also
--------

-   Atil
-   Balymer
-   Bulgaria
-   Bulgarism
-   Bulgars
-   Kingdom of Balhara
-   Chuvashia
-   Khanate of Kazan
-   Khazaria
-   Tatarstan
-   Qol Ghali
-   List of Sunni Muslim dynasties
-   Battle of Samara Bend
-   Volga Tatars
-   Tatars
-   Old Great Bulgaria

References
----------

External links
--------------

-   Bariev, R(iza) X. 2005. [*Волжские Булгары : история и
    культура*](http://www.bulgarizdat.ru/articles.shtml#bi02) (Volga
    Bulgars: History and Culture). Saint Petersburg: Agat.

Category:History of the Turkic peoples Category:Turkic dynasties
Category:1240 disestablishments Category:Volga Bulgaria|\*
Category:1240s disestablishments Category:States and territories
established in the 7th century Category:Iranian dynasties
Category:Former Muslim countries in Europe
